# Sun Oct 28 09:00:19 EDT 2018
## Jean Cocteau’s _La Belle et la Bête_

This film was a sumptious exercise in avant-garde art seeking to suspend all
political aspirations. It’s hard not to see it as anything _but_ once you hear
that. Jean Cocteau was at odds with Jean Paul Sartre over his lack of political
committment and Jean Cocteau directly addresses Sartre and his fellow
Cocteau-critics in the opening preamble, which asks us to suspend our disbelief
and think a little more like a child while they watch his film.

The film is _not_ for children, though is not necessarily inappropriate for
them. There is nothing sexually explicit in the film, though there _is_ quite a
bit of sexual imagery and motif.

The film is somewhat boring until Belle’s father arrives at the castle. Then the
film opens up into a magical world. The Beast has an interestingly high-pitched
voice, where modern audiences are used to a deep growl. His costume is directly
inspired by a 17th century nobleman with a strange disease that caused him to
grow fur all over. (I’ll have to see where I read that; it’s not on the
Wikipedia (at least anymore). The Beast resembles a lion in this costume. 

Enough. Now about the imagery. The arms sequences were fascinating. It was
interesting to see how Cocteau would represent the magical castle in 1946
without special effects or animation. The way he did it was with a very
performance art-like effect of bodyless arms holding and controlling everything
in the castle. They unfold to create light, serve wine, open curtains, and
everything one could want in a servant. The faces in the fireplace were
delightfully strange and eerie. Bodyless arms are strangely inhuman, in contrast
to the fireplace faces.

Belle’s entry to the castle was quite formal and balletic. The whole film has a
feel of a ballet, in that regard. Belle strikes poses that are entirely
uneccesary except in the context of balletic dance, where movements communicate
emotion and meaning. So, for instance, when she strides up a staircase and
approaches a doorway whose hands pull back the curtains, she holds onto the left
side of the doorway and “throws” herself back agains the left wall. I put throws
in quotations because it’s in no way a violent motion. It is slow and balletic.
It serves, presumably, in the language of film, to show Belle looking at her
surroundings in fear, but in the language of cinematography, it is to pose Belle
before the camera in a passionate manner.

The next shot after that is Belle _literally gliding_ through a hallway will
billowing white drapery. It is absolutely meant to convey the angelic nature of
Belle. Indeed, moreso than the dialogue or story, the _imagery_ is what makes
Belle angelic and endearing. I honestly found much of what she said to the Beast
early on to be rather cruel. In 2018 most of us—if not our President—make a
great deal of effort not to be needlessly cruel to those with personal
deformities. We try very hard to interact with that person as though they were
utterly normal and we never even noticed that they have all this fur all over
their face. We try to make the person _feel_ normal. Belle does none of that.
From the moment Belle meets the Beast we realize that he is, in fact, _not_
cruel, that he is, in fact, _not_ a Beast, whatever his personal impulses. Belle
doesn’t care. She readily calls him an animal when he accuses her of treating
him like one, which seems to hurt him far more than his personal choice of name:
Beast.

I found most interesting that I never grew to hate Avenant, the Gascon analogue.
In this film it is the sisters that are most unlikable. The brother was useless,
honestly, and that was most evident in his taking out a loan and causing such
problems for the father: his simplistic answer to his father when the loan shark
is taking all the furnishings is the one thing that most made me dislike him,
but I never _hated_ him as I hated the sisters. Avenant I _never_ hated. I was
annoyed that he had to die. Also, I was quite confused by the fact that the
Beast _became_ Avenant. Did the Beast steal his form? Or did he look like
Avenant before he was made Beastlike? That was never clear to me. I believe the
former, and not the latter.

Also interesting is that, unlike in the later films, Belle admits to Prince
Charming that she _did_ love Avenant.

To be rather honest, it is _Belle_ that I had to warm up to, and not the Beast.
A common reaction to the end of the film, when the Beast transforms into a
handsome man identical to Avenant (the Gascon analogue), is to wish he’d stayed
the Beast. The Beast is in fact quite charasmatic. There were two features of
the Beast, however, that irritated me: one was the high pitch of the Beast’s
voice. It made him seem more pathetic and less noble, where in the later films
he comes across as _quite_ regal. The other is his ignorance. It’s never
_shown_, only told, but it is irritating and pathetic, childlike, when during
their first dinner the Beast tells Belle that, in addition to his hideousness,
he is also not very smart. In later films it is Belle’s bookishness that
initiates the warming between the two. It is, in fact, one of the aspects of
Emma Watson’s character that I find most charming. It is also what I found most
endearing about Emma Watson’s Beast. Can anyone dislike a well-read man, no
matter how hideous? Most “nerds,” or undesirable men, are simply geeks, who care
only about superficial and immature entertainment like Japanese anime, pokemon,
and video games. There is no apprehension of the deeper, more beautiful aspects
of human art. The Beast, in contrast, was worldly in the bookish way. He
understood humanity. His hardness was the result of _too much_ inner feeling (a
common trope, if not human experience). Edward’s bookishness, in Twilight, was
in fact one of the very few redeeming qualities to those movies. Someone who has
consumed as much art as a 90 year old man can but retains youthful vigor is
fascinating. It is one of the unfortunate aspects of most humans that they do
not realize a love of art (or full apprehension thereof) until they are old and
cramped and unable to experience life _through_ the wonder-eye gained by
sustained art consumption.

Perhaps it is _that_ that most makes one love the Beast in the later versions
and why we love bookish people. A bookish man, or, more broadly, a person who
has consumed a great deal of good art (be it literature, visual art, drama,
cinema, or music) has developed an inner eye that allows them to see deeper
meaning in day-to-day life. They recognize the beautiful symbolism when their
lover bites into an apple, or can spot a beautiful collision of colors in the
clouds when the sun sets. Most people glance right over such subtle everyday
beauties. But consumers of art _do not_. They experience life more deeply, so a
bookish Beast, or a bookish vampire, cannot possibly be a true monster, no
matter their urges, because someone who experiences life so deeply cannot
possibly be cruel, no matter how hard their exteriors. They are not _rogues_
with hearts of gold: they are _Beasts_ with hearts of gold.
