# Mon Nov 19 16:23:18 EST 2018
## Marcel Carné’s _Les Enfants du Paradis_

At 3 hours and 10 minutes, this film was longer than I expected. The French
answer to _Gone with the Wind_, as it was styled, it is similar to that American
title in that they are both about unrequited love and the sad fact that we
cannot choose _who_ we love. It is also similar in that they both end on rather
open-ended and somber notes.

One could spend a while, I think, cataloguing the similarities and differences
between these two films. They’re both period pieces, they both have unique
female leads (though, obviously, Scarlett is a rather unsympathetic character,
where Garance _is_ sympathetic), they both deal with love triangles, they’re
both rather sweeping, they both touch on the ways society preys on women, etc.,
etc.  But to catalogue all these similarities and differences is a rather
tiresome endeavor, so I’ll just talk about _Les Enfants du Paradis_.

One of the first and most interesting facts I found out about this film is that
it was shot during the German occupation of France, and, even more interesting,
Arletty, who played Garance, was having an affair with a German officer and was
convicted of treason because of it shortly after the war, spending 18 months in
prison. This really blew my mind, and colored her character. Even stranger,
really, _quite_ strange, actually, is the fact that she, the lead female, _was
47 when this film was released_. How anyone can watch the film and think that
she is more attractive than the character Nathalie, played by a 23-year-old
María Casares is kind of beyond me. Garance certainly has more personality than
her, but in the film it is constantly remarked that she is more beautiful, which
I don’t see at all. Arletty was quite attractive for her age, but not more
beautiful than María Casares was at the same time.

In the Criterion Collection’s Three Reasons video for this film they highlight
the magic of the theatre as one of their reasons, and it’s not very difficult to
see why. Eminently _French_ is this approach to romance. Where Americans are
more interested in business, which is why most of _Gone with the Wind_ (perhaps
the book more than the film) is concerned with business and material acquisition
set in the midst of the sweep of history and a complex love story, Marcel Carné
sets his love triangle in the midst of theatre, and, while using historical
figures, doesn’t give a fig for the actual history of the period (which was
really quite interesting, as considering the 1830 Paris Commune and the 1848
European uprisings).

Where _Gone with the Wind_ is chiefly concerned with a headstrong, thrifty, and
ultimately practical woman, _Les Enfants du Paradis_ is far more interested in
Garance’s devil-may-care happiness. When she quits her job and loses her
apartment and has literally no place to go in the middle of a storm her smile
hardly cracks. She says to Baptiste at one point that he must understand her as
she is, not as he wants her to be, and this seems to be her character’s greatest
flaw. She is _not_ in any way as her admirers want her to be. She is fully
interested in living life for the moment and couldn’t care less about what the
future actually brings. She is essentially a picaroon. All of her problems, it
seems to me, come from this.

This analysis is quite weak. I ended up talking more about _Gone with the Wind_
than I meant to. I liked this film quite a lot, but it seems to be mostly a
grand romance with none of the symbolic content I’m becoming used to and
interested in. I therefore don’t know what to say about it. But I had to write
something. I might have written significantly more last night, or even this
morning, but at 4:40 pm the next day with a bottle of champagne and robiolo
cheese waiting for me, I’m kind of at a loss for words.
