Tue Nov 20 17:25:28 EST 2018
----------------------------
Ingmar Bergman’s _Smultronstället_
==================================

At 7:02 seconds I have decided to begin a narration.

We have seen the old man, Isak Borg, in his office, finishing a letter of some
kind, describe himself as an old pedant (something to which I can relate), and
subsequently begin to describe a strange dream, set in abandoned Swedish
streets. Much dream imagery follows:

Symbol #1: a handless clock. This is interesting. Borg is preoccupied by it,
frightened even. Time is ceasing to move. Is time up for Borg? He _is_ elderly.
The strange thing is the lack of hands.

He walks the abandoned streets in an excellent, Andersonian tracking shot back
and forth. We come upon

Symbol #2: a man with a squinched face, who subsequently falls to the ground and
liquifies. _And away we go!_

Symbol #3: a horse-drawn hearse, runs into a light post, loses a wheel, rocks,
loses it’s coffin, and the horses trot off

Symbol #4: a dead person’s hand, hanging out of aforementioned coffin, which
subsequently comes alive, reaches for Borg’s hand, upon which action the actual
body becomes visible to us, and it is Borg himself, attempting to kiss (?) the
living, dreaming, Borg.

Wake up Mr. Borg.

Okay. It seems we are preoccupied with death and time. I cannot properly analyze
all of these symbols (perhaps they are not meant to be one-to-one
correspondences, as is natural with symbols).

Borg seems to have a renewed spirit of life. There’s actually some great humor
here. 

At 13:37 (scene transition) we already see something interesting going on with
Bergman’s female characters. There are two women thus far: Marianne (his
daughter-in-law) and Miss Agda, his housekeeper. Both of them are curt with him.
There’s an obvious contrast in their age. Agda is quite bossy.

There’s a Chrismas Carol quality to the story thus far. The old man is
Scrooge-like, overly formal and—I don’t know yet if Marianne’s criticism of
selfishness is accurate yet—rules-based.

I think we’ve found the Bergmanian wild strawberries. From the Wikipedia:

>The original Swedish title is _Smultronstället_, which literally means "The
>wild strawberry patch" but idiomatically signifies an underrated gem of a
>place, often with personal or sentimental value. 

I swear Bibi Andersson is an angel.

Why is Bibi playing a super young Sara as well? That’s rather interesting.

This is getting interesting. When the couple from the crash gets in the car we
now have a rather full load.

Bergman is a bit more advanced than I’m used to.

Ah, Max von Sydow!

Oh, no, a Bergman debate on God and rationalism.

The clock with no hands! Time is still running out. 

I have not seen enough Bergman (literally just _The Seventh Seal_) to know how
he utilizes rain, but here it goes.

And Dream 2:

Symbol #1: bats (death)

Symbol #2: wild strawberries (innocence of childhood)

Symbol #3: a mirror (the soul)

Symbol #4: a baby (responsibility)

Return to symbol #1

Symbol #5: piano music, cut to violin music (solitude): the music is quite
plaintive and presented while watching a happy couple that reperesents the death
of Borg’s dream.

Symbol #6: moonlight (continuation of symbol #5)

Symbol #7: stigmata

Symbol #8: an examination

Symbol #9: an eye under a microscope

Symbol #10: a laughing dead woman

These are simplistic analyses. But I don’t think far off. We then see the rape
of Isak’s wife. I think.

There is a Christian in-the-world-but-not-of-it subtext to Marianne’s flashback.

Wow. How Bergman can instantly isolate a man in the midst of such happiness.

I feel like the choice of pictures on the wall is not insignificant. We have a
semi-cubist nude, like Modigliani, and a very old map of the North Sea.

What a fascinatingly mythological ending to the three young hitchhikers.

---

Next day, Wed Nov 21 08:24:44 EST 2018, I will provide a bit of analysis.

The film, as I’ve said, is profoundly Dickensian, in that it resembles a sort of
Christmas Carol epiphanic transition for the main character.

I’m also starting to see the profoundly feminine focus of Bergman. _The Seventh
Seal_ was not particularly feminine, but both _Wild Strawberries_ and _Summer
with Monika_ _were_.

Unfortunately, I don’t seem to have a flowing keyboard right now, so I’ll break
here.

Wed Nov 21 09:26:38 EST 2018 — Ultimately, what is perhaps most fascinating
about this film is the avant-garde, Freudian, and Jungian imagery that haunts
it. I’ve already listed all those symbols, in prototypical autistic fashion, but
they are what separates this film from a more conventional moral movie like, say
_A Christmas Carol_ or Nick Cage’s _A Christmas Story_. The film’s basic idea is
almost identical to those films and we get the sense of therapy for the author
(Bergman himself).
