# Wed Nov 28 18:06:39 EST 2018
----------------------------
## Yasujirō Ozu's _東京物語_ or _Tōkyō Monogatari_
===========================================

Considered to be one of, if not _the_ greatest film of all time, Ozu's _Tokyo
Story_ is proof that I am still a total amateur at film analysis and
observation.

While, for instance, I can thoroughly grok and absolutely
roll-in-like-a-pig-in-slop films like _Andrei Rublev_ and _Columbus_, which,
specifically, is heavily influenced by Ozu, I feel quite out of my depth with
this film. I find it poignant, and sad, and well-made, but I do not experience
the sort of elevation and awestruckness that I read other critics and cinephiles
experiencing with regard to this film. It quite saddens me, really. I feel that
perhaps I should have waited to watch this film.

I found the father's mannerisms to be poignant, sad, and at times, comical. He
seems slightly out-of-it quite often.

To tell the truth, upon reflection, as is the case with so much that I read and
watch and look at (art-wise), I am starting to grasp a depth I didn't
necessarily detect upon actually viewing the film.

There was no out-and-out symbolism that I could detect. Perhaps that is not
Ozu's way. There were no shots that directly called attention to themselves,
except in the way of his particular style, low, still shots resembling the
perspective of sitting on a “tatami” mat, nearly formal composition in some
cases (as when the family sit around the dead mother, four of them sitting
facing to the right of the screen in various states of grief, one—Keizu, if I
recall—facing toward the camera; it is, in all reality, a painterly shot). There
were no lines or performances that caused one to sit up and say “that’s acting!”
But there was a persistent masterfulness that leads me to think of _Jiro Dreams
of Sushi_ and Jiro's obsession with shokunin-ship (craftsmanship). It is a quiet
genius that Ozu possesses.

The conversation between Noriko and Kyoku, in which Kyoku expresses her disgust
with her older siblings, and Noriko explains the “facts of life” is perhaps one
of the most philosophically melancholic scenes I've ever watched in my life,
truth be told. The basic concept she's expressing is Heraclitus' “You cannot
step into the same river twice.” The Problem of Things Change is _the_ central
problem for all living things. It is both life and death. Noriko's explanation
encompasses both the facts of children getting older and the facts of Japan's
entire social structure changing in light of post-war changes.

In fact, the entire concept of the film seems to resolve around this very
problem. What is the significance of Noriko? Is she a symbolic representation of
some part of society? I think, perhaps, not. I do, however, fully acknowledge
the truth of her situation. She seems not to have any parents of her own, and
having experienced the loss of family so close to her (her husband) she
appreciates what little she has (her parents-in-law) all the more readily than
those (the Hirayama children) who have experienced no losses.

The way Shige asks for one of her mother's pieces of clothing, initially, seems
respectful. It is when she asks for the second that we begin to think that she
is getting a little demandy. That was masterful on the part of Ozu.

I feel I have nothing more to add. I may, eventually, rewatch the film and write
more. This should suffice, for now.
