# Wed Nov 21 17:46:29 EST 2018
## Jean Luc Godard's _A Bout de Souffle_

I am going to begin generally taking notes when I watch films.

At 8:58 I'll make a couple observations.

First, the film has an indelible atmosphere of cool. Even when the jazz music
has become old, and the jump cuts are no longer as ground breaking as they once
were, Michel _still_ radiates cool bad boy. I can totally be a square and
criticize his callous sociopathy, but ultimately, _he defines cool_. Why are
cool people evil? Or, why is an evil person cool? I do not know. But he _is_.

Second, he seems to be especially interested in foreign girls. I cannot say this
of his lookout in the very beginning, but in the apartment of the first girl he
meets up with, he corrects her French. We all know that Jean Seberg is American.

Third, there are certain...tropes? Motifs? Visual gestures that get repeated.
Michel rubs his thumb across his lips throughout the film, as I recall, and Jean
Seberg even picks up the habit. It is a sensual movement. I wonder if someone
Godard or Belmondo knew someone that did it, because it doesn't seem like the
sort of gesture you just invent, but it also doesn't seem like the sort of
gesture that people commonly do.

Also, making faces in the mirror. This is a fascinating one. I have a feeling
it's somewhat...I don't want to say symbolic, but it certainly has an effect. It
reminds me that I'm watching a film. The faces remind me of the laugh/cry drama
faces.

Ah, vivre dangereusement jusqu'au bout.

There is a car accident where a man appears to have died. The accident is
offscreen. It seems so much like the accident at the beginning of Cocteau's
_Orpheus_, which Godard had undoubtedly seen.

It seems Belmondo has played _2_ characters who go by the name László Kovács.

Why do the French piss in sinks? Okay, nevermind. I get it now.

Holy shit the ending is profoundly symbolic and philosophical.

I will not elucidate now. Tomorrow.

---

Fri Nov 23 15:07:29 EST 2018: Okay, so maybe I didn't end up talking about this
the next day. But here we go anyway.

So the most peculiar thing about this film is that it seems eminently _non_
philosophical from the beginning and then becomes highly existential and
symbolic about 3/4 of the way through. I noticed last night that there is a
highly significant obsession with spectacle, film, mediated experience in the
film. There has always been an obsession among filmmakers about film, such that
there are far more characters who are interested in film in film than in real
life, but it seems highly peculiar, or, perhaps, conspicuous in Breathless.
Michel and his on-screen-for-a-moment girlfriend have worked in film, there is a
conspicuous moment where Michel examines a poster of Humphrey Bogart in
admiration, and there's a persistent quality to the film where Michel is trying
to inhabit an onscreen role in real life (in the film, of course). Society of
the Spectacle wouldn't come out for another seven years, but I could have
mistook the film for having been directed by a Situationist.

For instance, throughout the film the main character is obsessed with the
newspapers. He buys them and throws them on the ground. He's always looking for
news of his murder, which is the obvious explanation, but there's also an
element where we see him questing for fame. He _wants_ to be in the news. He
_wants_ to be famous, even for something notorious or infamous.

There is also a repeated element, especially in the second half of the film, and
increasing toward the end, where news bulletins about the plot are flashed on
screen. We see how close the police are coming to actually catching Michel. It's
as if you feel Michel's claustrophobia: the cops are closing in, man. But it's
an intrusion of the media, of the spectacle, into the world.

Michel seems continuously to be obsessed with this spectacle. He makes faces in
a mirror (this is a recurrent motif) even, pained though it is to him, in his
dying moment. It seems to me to be a massive symbol of the way spectacle,
mediated experience, or _cinema itself_ intrudes upon life, overturns it.
Simulacra, representation, takes over for the Ding an Sich. 

There's a fantastic few scenes where bhe fourth wall is broken. Right in the
beginning, Michel talks to the audience about if you don't like x, y, or z (I
can't remember what), then you can get stuffed.

There's also the whole “Live dangerously until the end” thing. It's a
devil-may-care attitude that pervades the film. I've always wanted that as a
tattoo. But it adds to the laissez-faire, devil-may-care approach to the film.
But life intrudes, constantly, and we really _do_ care, in spite of our
posturing. So when (in a fantastic scene) we see Godard himself looking back and
forth between a paper and Michel, we see Michel ducking down, hiding his face,
because he _does_ care.

And yet, at the end, he decides not to run, even as Patricia tells him she's
turned him in. This is the moment _everything_, even death, becomes spectacle.
Patricia doesn't turn him in because it's the right thing to do, she turns him
in because, fuck, she's crazy? That's for damn sure. But because, as she says,
she doesn't want to be in love with him. It _is_ a game to her.

Michel's dying shot is massively significant. And to analyze it would take many
pages. First of all, it's significant because it's interminable. Second,
Belmondo runs down the street holding his back in a highly stylized, nearly
balletic, way. Even in death Michel is spectacle. Finally, he's shot in the
_lower_ back. Why seems particular, significant. I do not _know_ why, except to
say that Godard made that choice in particular, not at random. He isn't shot in
the heart. He isn't shot in the shoulder. He's shot at the base of the spine,
just above the butt. _Why?_ I feel that this film is not one I'll crack open in
this review, but I'm seeing that it was brilliant from the moment I bought it
and popped it in the DVD player 10–13 years ago.

To top it all off, Michel closes his own eyes in death.

And I do want that tattoo.
