# Fri Nov 23 20:09:51 EST 2018
## Nicolas Winding Refn’s _Only God Forgives_

This film uses color in a much different way.

Fascinating shot I just saw. Ryan Gosling stands in front of his mother on the
bed, who hugs him around the waist while his leg is between her legs. Very
Oedipal there.

Refn also likes to go back and forth between harsh shots on the mother’s face,
so that she appears old and ugly, and soft shots, where she looks young and
beautiful.

She pets his arm. It’s so Oedipal it’s like screaming.

The other thing that’s fascinating about this film, as opposed to _Drive_, is
that Bangkok is like Cormac McCarthy’s Mexico: violence can strike like heat
lightning, and justice is about as common as...Fuck it, I’m not going to try to
find a simile.

There is a ton of dream imagery of sex and violence that goes entirely
unexplained. Refn is obsessed with eros and thanatos.

Enucleation is generally one of the most horrible disfigurations. The
deprivation of any sense is a horrible disfiguration that should never be wished
on anyone.

The Thais really do love their karaoke.

Refn seems to convey a lot through the corny art reproductions in the film. For
instance, a picture of Michaelangelo’s David hanging over four prostitutes in
prim dresses; a picture of the great wall of china behind the police chief while
he’s singing karaoke.

Julian killed his own father with his bare hands. Oedipal?

This film is about Abrahamic Justice vs Tribal Justice. Julian is trapped
between those two concepts, which seems to be why he is not so committed to his
mother’s idea of justice (he shrugs off Billy’s murder and kills the assassin
before the assassin kills the little girl).

Wow, he stabs his mother’s womb.

And reaches into it.

What is the point of the Oedipal thing? I mean really? Refn seems strongly
Freudian, with Oedipal conflicts and a strong Eros and Thanatos dialogue. But
the Oedipal conflict seems superfluous. I don’t see how it informs the central
conflict of Abrahamic vs Tribal justice.

WE KEEP CUTTING BACK TO THE COPS IN THE KARAOKE BAR with the chief singing. What
_is_ this.

The only two people that are left are Julian and the Chief, the two people
closest to the Abrahamic form of justice, with Julian seeming to have submitted
to an Abrahamic debrachiation (I looked for a word that meant to have your arm
severed and stackexchange had mediocre answers except for one comment with 41
upvotes and that word, which I cannot find in any dictionaries online, so...
Going with it anyway). In the end Abrahamic Justice won.

I see that Refn has said that Chang (the Chief) is a man who thinks he is God.
This is quite fascinating, as I got the sense at several points in the film that
he might _be_ God. If that were the case, we can see a few things pop into
place. Julian’s name resembles Jacob. We see Julian _fight_ with God—read:
struggle—so he’s essentially Israel, which puts his willful submission to
Chang’s punishment into a sensible mythological framework. The music plays into
this theme: it’s organic, i.e., using an organ; it is church music that is meant
to lift you into the ineffable; Bachic.

A fascinating scene occurs midway through, when Chang is torturing the white
club owner who set up the hit for information. He tells the girls to keep their
eyes closed no matter what. The shot of the girls all closing their eyes to the
torture is so heavily freighted with meaning it’s hard to miss it. Essentially,
they are blind to the justice being carried out. Either society must turn a
blind eye to justice’s doings (which seems to be the case with Chang’s justice,
which follows no sense of rule of law but simple frontier justice with a healthy
dose of extrajudicial killing) or that justice _itself_ is blind. 

I find that a lot of people who have a legitimate interest in art have a
complete lack of understanding of some of the largest references _in_ art. I say
this because some of the pretty glaring symbology I’ve talked about in this
review (for instance, Julian being Jacob; the aspect of Abrahamic vs Tribal
justice; these all seem to be pretty obvious to me) are completely missed by
people with not totally terrible understandings of the films. Another time I
noticed something similar was when I read an analysis of bird imagery in _Andrei
Rublev_. It was as though they had no idea that birds generally represent souls
in Christian literature. These aren’t secret symbols, and if people were more
familiar with the basic aspects of culture (Greek Tragedy, the Bible, and
Shakespeare) then their analyses would be about 90% more professional and
accurate.

It really is quite fascinating how _few_ people these days are familiar with
these three basic pillars to modern culture. I _live_ in a family of culturally
illiterate people, who couldn’t name the title of a single Greek Tragedy and
would have to ask who wrote Merchant of Venice, who, despite being ostensibly
Christian and act offended at the word goddamn do not have a clue what is
actually _in_ the Bible. I largely think that 90% of “Christians” today don’t
actually know what’s in it either; how can anyone possibly like a God that kills
children for making fun of an old man (the bears, the children, and Samuel, for
reference). Of course _I_ understand the symbolic and mythological nature of
these stories, but if these _Christians_ believe it all to be literal truth,
then how can they find that God to be a just one? The reason is simple: they
haven’t read the goddamned Bible they purport to believe in; nor have they
explored the actual mythological meaning of the words within it. Any truly
sophisticated analysis of the meaning of the Bible will yield a complete
disbelief in the existence of an afterlife, for instance; the Jews certainly
didn’t believe in it, and neither did Jesus; the Kingdom of Heaven is an
extended metaphor for peace and tranquility and mystic revelation.

Anyway, I’ve digressed for far too long. Let’s just conclude with this: Nicolas
Winding Refn is an auteur, and the people who walked out are morons.

Oh, wow, he directed _The Neon Demon_! I guess I’ll have to watch that next!
