# Sat Nov 17 16:15:21 EST 2018
## Justin Benson and Aaron Moorhead's _The Endless_

Okay, before I begin, I had better declare at the outset that I knew one of the
directors while we were both in high school, had several online discussions with
him about filmmaking, and attended an (admittedly minor) shoot with him. I am
speaking of Aaron Moorhead.

I will say, also at the outset, that it is a great advancement over what he was
making back then, for obvious reasons. And it does, indeed have it's charms.
There are moments where it shines, especially in moments when they seek to
convey the eerie or uncanny, and it is effective in that it refuses to
compromise the atmosphere and film by devolving into a monster flick (i.e., they
refuse to actually show the monster), and it even has some rather impressive
technical aspects (a wonderful cut in the beginning from a circular firepit in a
video on an old Hi8 tape to the circle of a bucket full of cleaning supplies
magnificently contrasts the sublime of ascension spoken of in the Hi8 tape to
the mundane of the brothers' present lives), but falls short in several highly
significant ways.

The first, and major, defect in the film is that Benson and Moorhead decided to
act in their own film. The first problem with this is that they aren't as
effective of actors as they seem to think they are. The second is _they're too
damn old_. Aaron was at least a year older than I was in high school, and I'm
thirty now, so he's, yeah, about to turn 31 according to Wikipedia, and he
played the _younger_ brother. His attempts at naivety and innocence were wholly
non-believable. The constant queries from camp members about whether he
remembered them, how young he was back then, etc. come across as very confusing
as well. There are significant plot holes in this too: the video shows the boys
in newsreels as being in their mid- to late-teens when they left the cult. There
is no way in hell that someone who spends a significant amount of time somewhere
in their midteens doesn't remember a heck of a lot more than Aaron (his
character's name) remembers in the film without having been significantly
traumatized and repressing the memories. Yet there is no exporation of this
possibility whatsoever in the film. Some other lame attempts at humor regarding
the naivety of Aaron in the film fall completely flat: when he doesn't
understand that the phrase "sleeping together" refers to sex, for instance. And
the entire "Justin is too world-weary from having to constantly care for his
brother and look out for him and control everything he does" is seriously
problematic: Aaron's age is never explicitly stated in the film, but this sort
of dynamic only works if he's like 17 or 18, not nearing 30. If he _is_ 30,
_and_ needs his older brother to be a helicopter brother, then he has some
serious mental issues and this needs to be explored in the film. Furthermore,
the _conclusion_ to this aspect of the film, that he just wants to be able to
make decisions for himself, is so pat and cliché (even within the
helicopter-older-brother-plot-that-doesn't-work) that it brings down the film
even further.

The second aspect that brings this film down is a generally amateur
understanding of framing and staging. This is somewhat overstated, in that they
do deftly and expertly create some rather intriguing settings (a tent that
appears to be expeditionary equipment from the twenties, stands out in my mind),
but they seem utterly unable to stage _minor_ settings that are actually more
important. The staging of the expeditionary-tent-from-the-twenties recalled a
personality trait I had long ago observed in Moorhead (an
aww-shucks-spielbergian-people-just-want-spectacle attitude toward story-telling
and filmmaking that is admirable in its own right), but the staging of the
deprogramming office was entirely unbelievable. There was one massive problem
with it: it was too cluttered. It totally distracted from the actual struggles
Justin was communicating to his therapist (a therapist may have been more
effective than a deprogrammer; especially considering we never believe Justin
needs deprogramming, he just needs a therapist; as it stands, the deprogrammer
seems to be a crutch for the totally-cynical-and-cult-hating Justin, and this,
if it was what they were going for, is never explored). Just off the top of my
head, I can imagine a more effective shot: lying back on a classic therapist's
couch, a shot from over head, slowly spiraling downward into his face as he
talks about his problems and deep, bassy, atmospheric music subltly builds. It
is as cliché as what they went with, and more suitably conveys the eerie and
sublime. The character begins to seem like he's spiralling into his own
problems.

If the way the deprogrammer's office was so cluttered was intentional, perhaps
to convey the government-provided nature of the deprogrammer, or that “it's all
they could afford,” then that should have been explored.

This is generally the _third_ problem with the plot. It fails to explain itself
and generally has the feeling of a b-rated spectacle. I do not mean that it
should have had a ton more exposition, in fact, that is generally _not_ what I
am interested in. But the film is at once not interested enough in symbolism to
leave out exposition of the actual nature of what they're dealing with, and not
big budget scifi flick enough to leave out any more interesting symbolic
exploration of the subject. Moorhead never seemed to me to be a philosopher. But
this film is crying for a philosopher to give it intellectual heft. In fact, I
stuck with it for as long as I did because I'd hoped that the film was going to
be an interesting riff on the nature of the unknown and sublime. Especially when
it starts with this quote from H.P. Lovecraft:

>The oldest and strongest emotion of mankind is fear, and the oldest and
>strongest kind of fear is fear of the Unknown.

(Don't get me started on the fact that they used two separate quotes, and that
the other quote tries to create the brother-dynamic they think they're exploring
in the film, in an entirely ineffective way).

Perhaps this is the issue with the film: Benson and Moorhead wanted to make a
horror film about both fear of the unknown _brother_ issues. Perhaps I'm just
now seeing some symbolic heft: Justin's reactions to the Unknown are mirrored in
how controlling he is with his brother, but it's just not...

I don't know, I don't think they explored this subject enough or well enough.
Perhaps if they had casted two younger actors it could have avoided distracting
from this exact point. Actually, it probably would have. Of course, then you
have to worry about casting two actors that are young and can act might be
problematic, but I'm not entirely convinced that Moorhead and Benson are very
good themselves. A 19 year old and a 15 year old would have been perfect for
this film, or thereabouts. And leave off the 10 year wait to go back.

That reminds me: the hand shots when Aaron was buying a camcorder were terrible.
God. Find another way to communicate that he's trying to find a camera that can
play the video. You're not supposed to acknowledge the camera (unless you're
breaking the fourth wall—or Stalker's wife talking to the camera), and Aaron's
fumbling was so clearly meant-for-the-camera that it totally broke the
film-trance (by film-trance, I mean the quality of suspending disbelief, being
in the movie, etc., etc.).

There were also scifi aspects of this film that could have been explored more
effectively. For one, the weird rock-poles were never properly integrated into
the film—neither their origin, nor their function. Second, the
expeditionary-tent-from-the-twenties was never explained (at all). And it would
have been interesting. I took from it that that guy had been stuck in his loop
since the twenties (or earlier) and that the loops get shorter as time goes on,
so his loop had been contracted to like five seconds. But that was never itself
exploited in the film.

Finally, a massive plot hole: the amount of time the brothers spent in the camp
before leaving in the first place is never actuallly conveyed, but it seems
significant. They show up at the camp in the film and have literally 3 days
before they're stuck in the camp forever. So... they showed up at the last 3
days of this cycle while their previous cycle was years before it restarted?
This was neither explained, nor entirely convincing.

Anyway, hopefully Moorhead (and Benson) learn to pay attention to some auteurs
on things besides technicals. Otherwise, they're destined for mediocrity (making
it to Netflix is one thing, making it to Denis Villeneuve levels, for instance,
is quite another, and getting to Spielberg's position, given their current
output, looks nigh on impossible). No excuses guys, I don't care if you have
funding issues; it certainly doesn't look like you do. Step it up.
