Tue Nov 13 07:58:31 EST 2018
----------------------------
:: konogada’s _Columbus_
========================

I want to right off the bat start by saying that this film suffers from terrible
search engine optimization and a terribly pretentious director: if you think
that using a word like _Columbus_ will make your film easy to find, you are an
idiot, and if you think that you are super deep and important enough to have a
single word name, like Madonna, let alone to use a lower case initial letter
preceded by two colons, you are a douche.

But since you’re a genius, I’ll let it slide.

Columbus shines precisely in that intellectual fantasy of the intellectual
everyman. I suppose I actually fit into that category in actual life, since I’m
certainly not in academia, have a good job, or even have people around me that I
can discuss interesting things with, but I went to college; I would not be an
everyman if not for life circumstances.

The film truly shines in these moments, where we see Cassandra geeking out over
the architecture in her hometown. In fact, one of the most magical moments of
the film is when Jin coaxes an explanation about what actually moves her about a
modernist bank, her favorite building. She starts by intellectualizing, a
typical trait of the intellectual-outsider; she’s never encountered a real
opinion about a work of art, so she doesn’t understand that sometimes we want to
know what it is about a piece of art that moves her; when she finally grasps the
idea, we cut from outside the building, watching their backs appreciate the
bank’s glass facade, to inside the building, through the crystal clear glass,
watching her face light up in unconscious enthusiasm, observing _her_ rather
than the building, _and we can’t hear a thing_. We are no longer architectural
enthusiasts, but what we truly are as a film audience, character enthusiasts, or
architectural enthusiast enthusiasts. It doesn’t matter _why_ she likes the
building, only how much, and how authentically. Haley Lu Richardson, the
actress, I have found out since viewing the film, is a dancer; I can think now,
as I replay the scene, of the enthusiasm with which my profoundly unintellectual
ex-girlfriend of a ballerina told me about Martha Graham, or the Ballet Russes.
In fact, it might have made the film lesser if we were privvy: typically when we
put into words what moves us they aren’t as interesting as we might expect.
Especially when we aren’t accustomed to dressing it up in personal
experience—for instance, she might like transparency (she’s obsessed with
heavily glass buildings) because of the opaque distance between herself and her
mother.

Another area where the film shines is in it’s shot framing. Kogonada, I believe,
must have been a major Ozu fan. I have yet to watch Ozu, but from my gleaning,
he was a profound framer. Every frame a painting, as the YouTube channel is
titled. For the first fifteen minutes of the film I was beginning to think the
camera would remain static for the entire film. This thought died when I watched
a slow tracking shot of Jin and Cassandra walking on either side of a
wrought-iron fence (a clear symbol of the cultural and class divisions between
them; there are subtle symbols throughout the film that show the distance
closing and widening between them). Another brilliantly framed shot occurs
halfway through the film, when Jin is in a hotel room talking to his father’s
protegee, played by Parker Posey. Jin is sitting on a bed within the frame,
talking to Eleanor sitting on the couch to our right, seen only in the mirror.
The shot never moves, but the characters move in and out of the frame, and in
and out of the mirror, and a detailed analysis could spend a thousand words
discussing the significance of every move. It is genius, and profoundly Ozun,
from my understanding of what he accomplished.

And there it is, I have confirmation. On [criterion.com](www.criterion.com)
there is a reference to where :: kogonada tweets and tumbles. His tumblr is at
[missingozu.tumblr.com](http://missingozu.tumblr.com). Pretty blatant there.

A still further shot that I love is a scene, also toward the middle, where Jin
and Cassandra are on a covered bridge and get in an argument. We see the sheer
disparity between their attitudes toward their parents: Jin hopes his
hospitalized father never gets better; Cassandra refuses to leave Columbus
because she’s taking care of her able-bodied mother. I am unfamiliar with
cultural attitudes toward family in Korea but it is my bet that, like in most
Asian countries, such as Japan and China, family is highly significant and Jin’s
attitude toward his father is more at home in America while Cassandra’s attitude
toward her mother is more at home in Korea. This does not seem accidental in the
least.

After Cassandra says something rather cruel (though plainly true) Jin says “I
think I’d better go” and begins to walk off. The shot is from behind C
A still further shot that I love is a scene, also toward the middle, where Jin
and Cassandra are on a covered bridge and get in an argument. We see the sheer
disparity between their attitudes toward their parents: Jin hopes his
hospitalized father never gets better; Cassandra refuses to leave Columbus
because she’s taking care of her able-bodied mother. I am unfamiliar with
cultural attitudes toward family in Korea but it is my bet that, like in most
Asian countries, such as Japan and China, family is highly significant and Jin’s
attitude toward his father is more at home in America while Cassandra’s attitude
toward her mother is more at home in Korea. This does not seem accidental in the
least.

After Cassandra makes a rather cruel statement, Jin says “I think I’d better go”
and begins to walk off. We see this in a shot from behind Cassandra, that
utilizes a shift in focus and camera location (I cannot remember the name of
this technique: one either moves forward and zooms out to shorten the depth of
field, or moves backward and zooms in to lengthen it) that results in an
expanding distance between the two to animate the emotional distance that just
opened up.

Also clearly not an accident is that they are having the discussion on a
bridge. I don’t actually know how to interpret it, except generally. Bridges are
meant to connect, bridge gaps, gulfs, etc. In the scene, I can only interpret
the bridge ironically: they are on a bridge, but a gulf is opening between them.

There’s also a fascinating sequence where Cassandra is totally rocking out to a
song by The Ettes. We can’t immediately tell what is going on because the camera
is so tight on her violent movements, all we can sense is the distress and rage
after she’s discovered that her mother is seeing someone again. When it pulls
back and she turns up the tunes we can watch Haley Lu Richardson’s training as a
dancer play out in her full body aggravation. It’s similar to the way Claire
Danes’ training as a dancer informs her full body emotional outbursts. Dancers
are simply more bodily animated.

The film’s conceit truly is interesting. It appeals greatly to art-conscious
coastal intellectuals because of architecture’s special place in art-conscious
people’s imaginations. I’ve met few intellectual people who aren’t at least
tangentially interested in architecture. There’s always been something pure and
ever-present about it. The use of architecture-enthusiasm, as opposed to, say,
art-enthusiasm or music-enthusiasm, is especially important because of the way
architecture is all around us and we rarely notice it. There are several
allusions to this in the film. The first is when Jin and Cassandra meet. He
suggests everyone in Columbus must be obsessed with modernist architecture and
she says he’d be surprised, no one gives a shit. He says he understands, he
doesn’t give a shit. “You grow up around something and it feels like nothing.”

I experienced this radical shift in perspective when I was away. I’ve never
truly appreciated monumental architecture, but when you spend years in a single
square mile, you see pictures of skyscrapers and masterpieces of architecture
and it makes you want to pull up a lawn chair in front of the skyscrapers or
monuments and just stare. Let life flow, I want to see this.
