Mon Oct 29 16:51:58 EDT 2018
----------------------------
Jean Cocteau’s _Orphée_
=======================

Ah, French cinema.

My second Cocteau film was, arguably, better than the first. This is partially
the result of the film being more intelligent--but only just; both films use
symbolic and haunting imagery to convey deeper meaning in the telling of a
legend--the difference, perhaps, being that _Orpheus_ is not as geared toward
popular audiences and is an Ancient Greek legend rather than a popular fairy
tale (which is, however, potentially a 4000 year old legend.

Orpheus is more _romping_, if I can say that. It seems to my mind, to be more
expansive. These are purely subjective statements, nearly impossible to properly
justify, except, perhaps, to point out that more than half of _The Beauty and
the Beast_ takes place in a lonely, claustrophobic castle set in an enchanted
forest whereas Orpheus _never feels lonely_. This is, I think, the result of
Heurtebise’s third wheel. And his character is quite delightful. I find
interesting that, despite already having heard Heurtebise declare his love for
Orpheus, which can be read in a platonic way, we can _only_ read his declaration
of love for Eurydice as sexual. This somehow seems wrong, because Heurtebise
seems to be _strictly_ platonic in his scenes with Eurydice, but nevertheless,
when he declares his love for Eurydice before the Death Tribunal it is clearly a
declaration of non-platonic love because 1, he is _hesitant_ to declare it which
he would not be if it was innocent platonic love, 2, it comes on the heels of
Death’s declaration of love for Orpheus which is clearly not platonic (and
Orpheus clearly reciprocates in an adulterous fashion), and 3, there is
awkwardness between Heurtebise and Eurydice later in the film, prompting
Heurtebise to ask Eurydice if she was bothered by his declaration. This honestly
adds an element to the film that I am at odds with: I cannot integrate it into
my understanding except to say that Eurydice, played by Maria Déa, is
astonishingly beautiful and it would be nearly impossible for any man not to
fall in love with her; her “nagging” barely qualifies as a detractor, as it’s
typically fairly justifiable. Plus, can a man every _be_ truly “nagged” by a
beautiful woman? That is a quite sexist question, but it _is_ a question,
nonetheless.

Cocteau’s films are marked by an element of honest special effects; that is to
say, they are not encumbered by decades of Hollywood gloss: a special effect
even without computer generated imagery coming out of Hollywood in, say, the
40’s would have a gloss of professionalness from decades of experimentation and
professionalization. Have a trick in mind? Hollywood has a way to achieve it.
Even without CGI. CGI is just cheaper. Cocteau’s effects, in contrast, are a
study in minimalism: they are the kinds of effects that anyone could pull off. I
can literally watch every scene (or nearly every scene) in a Cocteau film and I
already know how to achieve all of his effects. He is a massive fan of reversed
film (Terrence Malick, I just learned, utilized reverse-film for a shot in _Days
of Heaven_ to film locusts). Whether it be the lighting of candles in _Beauty
and the Beast_ or the revivement of dead bodies in Orpheus, he uses the effect
to it’s full potential. The issue becomes abuse. I cannot say whether he abuses
the effect after two films. Where I might have had issue is the scene where
Orpheus pulls on Death’s gloves: they suck onto his hands like they were meant
for them. Honestly, after the scene was over I changed my mind: it was fitting.

One disappointment I _did_ have was there weren’t _enough_ of Cocteau’s magical
effects. I purchased these two films after they had been stuck in my mind from a
Criterion Three Reasons trailer that depicted the magic: the shot of Orpheus
crossing through the mirror (using water in place of the mirror) and the shot of
Orpheus and Heurtebise in strange gravity in The Zone: the scene was shot on
it’s side, and they clearly used a slide to fly. They _were_ magical shots.
Perhaps I am a dumb consumer, but I wanted _more_ of those kinds of shots and
less of the reversed footage. Reversed footage is easy, those shots were one of
a kind images I will never forget.

The film is fantastically symbolic. I have interpreted it in my own way based on
the significance of mirrors: if, as Cocteau has said, it is about the successive
stages an artist must go through in order to find his voice, the whole film
unfolds like a Campbellian/Jungian hero journey, and the mirrors provide the
key: why does Orpheus travel through a mirror to reach the Zone? What must a
mirror symbolize to an artist? Simple: the act of looking into oneself. The
journey through a mirror is thus a journey into oneself, which is the whole idea
of a Jungian Hero Journey to begin with. Thus interpreted, most of the film
neatly cleaves into two, unveiling it’s innards. Death is an interesting frame
of reference, and Orpheus’s passion for her (and her passion for him) is the
most beautiful psychological warning of the film: like Narcissus, Orpheus is
clearly dead only when navel gazing. His obsesion with death is a morbid
self-obsession. A poet who is only concerned with himself is worth nothing at
all. It is only when the poet looks into himself, sees reflected all of
humanity, and writes to _that_ that he can be called great.

Eurydice, thus, becomes a form of muse. Her death results in Orpheus’s death:
that of an artist who becomes self-obsessed and thus too personal to be
universal in anyway (a truly esoteric poet?). Heurtebise and Death’s
self-sacrifice to the forces of the Zone to reverse time and return Eurydice,
while a complete upending of the myth--wow, no, I can’t interpret it except as a
poignant Hollywood ending. It might have been better with Eurydice gone and
Orpheus dead! Was Cocteau a coward? I cannot say. There was sadness to the end:
I never liked Death, but I was _quite_ fond of Heurtebise (his interactions with
Eurydice were the most charming parts of the film) and I felt for his submittal
to the forces of the Zone.

Regardless, this was a fantastic film. I don’t know yet how to place it in my
personal repertoire; to be rather honest it has the feel of one of those films
which I like but which barely register on the general public’s mind (like
Stardust, for instance, which I absolutely adore) but it is, nonetheless, a
Giant of French Cinema. In other words, it seems like the kind of film 99% of
Americans couldn’t care less to watch but is secretly endearing to me. :shrug:

All in all, I’m quite glad to see it on my shelf, and will revisit it in time.
