Wed Nov 21 09:40:44 EST 2018
----------------------------
Ingmar Bergman’s _Sommaren med Monika_
======================================

One of the very first things I noticed about this film, that is barely discussed
in the literature about the film, is it is a strong statement about _class_. In
fact, it’s all I saw in the film.

From the moment we meet Monika, it is quite obvious that she is of low class.
She chews her gum with her mouth open like a cow chewing the cud. Much of the
discussion of the film I’ve read thus far plays down this aspect, the actual
synopsis of the film on the Criterion website even going so far as to describe
_both_ Monika _and_ Harry as being from working-class families. I never got the
sense whatsoever Harry was from a working-class family. Harry’s mother is dead,
and we see very little of his family, but what we do see of it we know that (a)
he has a live-in maid of some kind, (b), his mother is dead and his father is
suffering from some sort of illness (probably depression), (c), his father has a
boat and is a member of a boat club (a profoundly bourgeois touch), and (d), he
is, in fact, well-mannered, well-dressed, and by nature _responsible_, despite
the interlude of “cutting loose” with Monika that forms the backbone of the
film. The only aspect of the entire film that could lead us to believe he is
working class is the nature of his job in the beginning of the film, but,
considering his age and the way his higher-ups interact with him, I’d just as
well assume it was a temporary teenage summer job gotten for him by his father.

I do not know if it is my upbringing that spots these details like a sore thumb.
From the beginning I had disapproval for Monika. I did sympathize, to some
extent, with her situation, but it seems to me pretty clear that Bergman
portrayed her negatively. Several times in the film she lights a cigarette
immediately upon waking in what seems to be a clear indication of her inability
to control her urges. She is lazy, selfish, and utterly uncouth. By contrast,
Harry is shown to be well-bred and well-mannered. It feels almost from the
beginning like Monika is taking advantage of him. I’m reminded of advice against
such girls I received from my parents growing up.

This dynamic builds to such a point that when Harry quits his job it is clear
that Monika is having a bad influence on him. He’s mean to his coworker, who
wasn’t mean to him. He takes off, selfishly, concerned only for himself.

Because of this blatant subtext in the film it seems the real core is a class
commentary atop a death-of-innocence narrative arc. It is easy for children to
ignore class. Harry and Monika’s youthful love seems to be the last stages of
the childhood innocence that knows no class, no race. But then when they return
to the world, class comes back to the fore (it already began to show up in the
roast-theft scene—Monika is unwilling to compromise with anything in life,
showing a prototypical lack of reality-awareness that the lower social classes
commonly exhibit).

This is distasteful. This might be a huge reason why most critics don’t
highlight this aspect of the film. It is a very elitist film. It disdains the
lower-classes. I do not think this is my subjective interpretation. The only
positive aspect we ever see of Monika is her eroticism. She’s not a responsible
person and she shows none of the grit or drive that allows people to transcend
the circumstances of their birth. The fault is not _just_ in her stars, but in
her demeanor.

I am perhaps being more harsh than I intended to be. We _do_ sympathize with
Monika’s desire to esape, even if we criticize her means (snaring a well-to-do
man). There is are two or three scenes that emphasize how bad her situation is:
when Harry is beaten by a jealous guy when he’s leaving her apartment, when
she’s horribly sexually harrassed and groped while at work, and when her dad
nearly beats her before she leaves forever—though, interestingly, there is a
subtext in that scene: it is her parent’s anniversary and the _man_ remembers,
and tries to make his wife happy; when Monika complains because the light goes
out and she’s trying to read, he is perhaps overbearing, but there is no
sympathetic understanding on her part of how happy a night it is for her
parents; all she cares about is her reading, selfishly; we see at the beginning
of the scene her mother working very hard and we can imagine how much she
deserves to be happy.

In fact, it seems that this dynamic is clearly emphasizing how dark Monika’s
future is without Harry, which makes her rebellion in the final act all the more
loathesome. She is a selfish idiot. I never rooted for her, I rooted for Harry
to be rid of her. I feel that this is Bergman’s point. It is because of the
well-meaning liberal sentiments of critics that it’s rarely discussed.

I will not criticize Bergman’s elitism. Such a dynamic truly exists. It is
practically an Italian neo-realist film. But it’s not a happy film, or one that
liberals should ever show conservatives.
