# Sun Nov 25 07:56:26 EST 2018
----------------------------
## Andrew Byrne's _In Darkness_
============================

Wow. You know what, I thought this was a pretty underrated film from about half
way through, but at the end, I'm stunned by how underrated it is for its
incredibly subtle storytelling.

First, I'll say that of all conflicts in the modern world it is the Bosnian
conflict that provdes some of the most interesting drama. There is such bad
blood stemming from that war that it provides some of the most compelling and
complex stories of revenge and motivation. I don't know much about some
conflicts, like the Iran-Iraq war, but the Bosnian conflict is something else.
The Syrian Civil War will one day take it's place as “conflict in recent memory
that provides a background for complex motivations.”

What was incredible about the end of the film is how subtly the truth of
Sophia's sight and duplicity is conveyed through facial gestures. I did not
understand what was so suddenly realized to cause her to jump back from Marc (I
guess that's his name; I pull it from Wikipedia). I had to rewatch the sequence
to get it. The only clue that we have that she actually has sight through the
entire sequence is that her eyes move back and forth, scanning, clearly seeing.
It's an incredible act of courage for the filmmaker to leave the entire meaning
of that to the audience watching intently enough.

Interestingly, some might criticize such a directorial decision on the basis
that it asks _too much_ of the audience. I disagree. Never compromise the beauty
of a film because you doubt the intelligence of the audience.

The weakest part of the entire film, I do have to say, though, was Emily
Ratajkowski. I don't think she could act her way out of a paper bag. She should
stick to modelling.

I also am not quite sure why the critics were so harsh on the film for
“gratuitous nudity.” While I don't see the necessity of the sex scene—in fact,
it _did_ feel unnecessary—the shower scene is quite useful. Regardless, weaker
films than this have had more nudity for less reason. The criticism is
misguided, at the least, and outright prude at the worst.

I am not typically one to believe that a film should rely on a twist to make
itself relevant, but this was an excellent twist.
