Sat Nov 10 21:27:37 EST 2018
----------------------------
Ingmar Bergman’s _Det sjunde inseglet_
======================================

I utterly did not plan on writing this review (I really need to stop calling
these reviews; observations, comments, analyses—they are not reviews), but I
just finished watching Peter Cowie’s Criterion Collection Commentary on Ingmar
Bergman’s _The Seventh Seal_ and I felt an absolute need to write something on
it.

First, before I engage in any form of criticism, I want to say at the outset
that it is, undoubtedly, a masterpiece. The film works on so many levels it
blows away anything Hollywood ever produced at the time. The story itself is
incredibly poignant, the humor is still funny sixty years later, and the
symbolism is incredibly trenchant.

I do have criticism though, as well as observations.

The first thing I will say is that I like Tarkovsky better. I have been watching
_Andrei Rublev_ over the past week or so, I am about to start the 205 minute
version, and I think it is a far better film than _The Seventh Seal_. Scratch
that, I _enjoy_ _Andrei Rublev_ far more, I cannot say that it is objectively a
better film.

My first criticism of _The Seventh Seal_ is this: Bergman seems, at least in
this film, to be far more theatrical than Tarkovsky, Tarkovsky to be far more
cinematic that Bergman. Bergman has a few interesting shots, but nothing like
the lengthy hot air balloon ghost ride at the beginning of _Andrei Rublev_, let
alone the dynamism of the lengthy tracking shot following Andrei into the woods
of the Pagan ritual. Tarkovsky is better with a camera than Bergman.

Second, the characterization of _The Seventh Seal_ is much more Dickensian than
anything Tarkovsky does. I cannot say that Tarkovsky has all dynamic
characters—Danil is, perhaps, not _quite_ in the round—but Andrei, Kirill, and
Boriska all show significant character movement, and even Foma shows _some_. By
contrast, the only character in _The Seventh Seal_ that shows true movement (and
even that movement is quite flat compared to the depth of Andrei) is the
Antonius Block (this is the true brilliance of _The Seventh Seal_, that I will
discuss in a bit). Plog, honestly, shows the second most movement, and that’s
not very interesting movement; Jons is quite a bit more interesting than Plog,
but shows no movement whatsoever.

Third, many of his cinematic tricks are rather dull and derivative. This is
perhaps unjust: he was shooting in 1959, afterall, but, for instance, the shot
where Jons pushes back the monk leaning against the rock in the beginning of the
film and a dead monk is revealed (Death?) is nowhere near as brilliant as Peter
Cowie makes it out to be. The ingenuity that went into that shot is about as
creative and original as it is for an English speaker to realize that his
written words will have more impact if the important and surprising parts come
at the end of his sentences. It is far from “one of the most impactful shots in
all of Bergman” as Cowie wants to describe it.

Fourth, and perhaps this is where my criticism begins to run out of steam—because
it’s rather petty and utterly unobjective, and I can criticize myself
for this criticism as much as I can Bergman—the movie is much too short, sweet,
and light for a subject as heavy as death! And this is why my third criticism is
so pathetic as to be ignorant: it is precisely by treating the subject of Death
in such a light and affable manner that he may be showing his true brilliance—I
really need to watch more Bergman to say much more about him as a filmmaker;
from here through the rest of this essay I will be praising his brilliance. But
I will say here that I think it is perhaps because I am still an overly
self-serious young man that I prefer the overly weary, interminable, dreadful
_Andrei Rublev_ to the light and cheerful _The Seventh Seal_.

The actual conceit of the film, is really quite incredible. I know Cowie wants
to say that Jons is given equal footing in the film as Antonius Block, but
that’s bullshit. As I’ve said, Block is the only character that shows any
movement.

From the beginning of the film Block is struggling with _the_ existential
crisis: that God is dead. He is not _necessarily_ dealing specifically with the
Problem of Evil, but that is one subproblem of his larger existential angst. He
has a crisis of faith, probably resulting from his experiences in the Crusades,
and has come home to a land of Death.

The conflation of the anthropomorphized Death (dressed in a ridiculous costume
akin to the crap Hollywood tried to pass off for cowboys and Indians in shows
like Gunsmoke) and the plague is really quite brilliant, as it allows Bergman to
literalize his _answer_ to Block’s existential question. The central movement of
the film, that Block makes, is from a position that he  that cannot deal with
the possibility that there (a), is no God, (b), is no divine meaning, and (c),
is nothing after death, to one where he accepts those facts and creates his own
meaning: other human beings. 

The pivot point is, perhaps, the wild strawberries and milk scene. In that scene
Antonius recognizes the beauty in Jof and Mia’s family, in all of his friends,
in the pure life of friends. It is not insignificant, Cowie tells us, that he
chooses strawberries: for Swedes, strawberries are the ultimate symbol of
summer, of, therefore, _life_. When Block returns to the chess game, after this
scene, he is no longer playing for himself: he is playing for the meaning of
life that he has discovered: others. The climax of the film comes when Block
knocks over the chess pieces in the forest, providing the crucial few seconds
for Jof and Mia to escape, for _others_, for _new life_ to escape and continue.
We are not the final end of our species: we are the carriers and progenitors.
This is a profound and mature acceptance of the existential quandary: without
divine meaning, God, and afterlife, what is the point? Others.

The conclusion to the film, which is integral to the Knight’s sacrifice (without
it the climax is meaningless, what is fascinating is that the debt comes due a
full ten or so minutes after the debt is made) is where Bergman’s skill as a
theatrical dramatist (as opposed to a cinematographer) becomes most plain. We
have the ultimate character depiction in a rather crowded (what I believe is
called an) American shot. In that short scene, we see each character’s response
to immediate death. The most fascinating of these are Plog, who is too stupid to
understand that death has come for him, Block, who pleads with God to spare his
life, which is, in a sense, strangely, a reversal of the movement he’s already
made in the climax, Jons, who as an atheist, quite defiant in the face of death,
and has a fantastic line when told to be quiet (“I will, under protest”), and
the mute girl, who through the entire scene (before Death has come into the
room) has looked to be _eager_ for Death to come, and therefore represents
someone so dejected that they welcome death.

Other master strokes through the film are 

1. The beautiful framing of the inital chess match
2. The presence in the frame for much of the film of Skat’s papier-mâché skull
   mask (a memento mori throughout the film)
3. The witty dialogue, especially involving Jons. Some of it is quite funny.
4. Bibi Andersson’s incredibly angelic beauty; in the wild strawberries scene,
   during her her dialogue with Block, she could melt an ogre’s heart.

I am _still_ quite unsure whether I will like Bergman. Considering all the
praise he’s gotten, I believe I will. It actually took me being somewhat
strangely dogmatic about watching Tarkovsky films to truly begin to love him. I
liked Solaris in spite of myself. I liked Stalker only through much interminable
effort. I adored Andrei Rublev. I have only watched, of Bergman, _The Seventh
Seal_. I am very interested in several of his films, chief among them _Wild
Strawberries_, _Summers with Monika_, and _Persona_. I have pre-ordered the
Criterion Bergman’s Cinema collection of 39 films (I got it for $150—which is
flat incredible for 39 films) and am anticipating watching quite a lot of
Bergman.

Truth be told, Andrei Rublev’s basic character movement/plot, while told
masterfully, is rather simplistic: it is the same as that in _All the King’s
Men_: it is the tale of an overly idealistic young man who encounters the
ugliness in life and becomes hard and cynical and finds a way to come back to a
happy medium, a chastened idealism. I don’t know why I wrote that in here, it
belongs in the other observation.

One interesting observation I forgot to make in the course of this: in _Andrei
Rublev_, Andrei says he does not want to paint a Last Judgement, he does not
want to paint something to frighten people; it is a mark of his idealism. In
_The Seventh Seal_, when Jons makes a comment about how the painting the painter
is painting won’t cheer anyone up, the painter says “Why does everything have to
be cheerful? Why can’t I scare people for once.” Precisely the opposite
attitudes.
