# Sun Nov 11 07:24:33 EST 2018
## Andrei Tarkovsky’s _Андрей Рублёв_
### 205 minute version

I am hereby beginning a running commentary on the 205 minute version of _Andrei
Rublev_.

The first thing I will note is that Criterion did not restore this version. I
suppose it would be unrealistic, it may have increased the price of the bluray
by as much as 33% (total guesstimation, that), but I wonder if they couldn’t
have restored the 205 minute version _instead_ of the 185 minute version and
then made al the identical cuts as Tarkovsky did to reproduce the 185 minute
version. That’s also, probably, very unrealistic. So I should just accept what I
have and realize that, as someone who loves the film enough to watch it twice,
all the features, and then watch the 205 minute version, I can deal. It’s just
incredible how much their restoration did.

Furthermore, I am very disappointed there is no full commentary. I would have
liked that.

Now I will begin. This will be a list of observations. I will use numbers for
easy reference.

## Prologue

1. The credit roll is black; it is against a white marble/granite background in
   the 185 minute version. This is rather insignificant, but it was a change
   made at the request of the censorship board.
2. I think generally they made a ton of cuts to tighten up the film. This
   version is already more leisurely and expansive, right in the Hot Air Balloon
   sequence. They show Yefim running across a field, the balloon workers working
   on the ropes; much more than in the 185 minute version.
3. The names changed. In the 205 minute version Yefim cries out for Arkhip
   multiple times. In this, his name is Arkhipushka. I wonder if that was just
   subtitle differences.
4. I have been amazed by the score of hte beginning. It’s so wonderfully
   foreboding. I don’t remember much else from the film like it.
5. Yefim’s shouts are significantly less ecstatic and not as full of wonder.
6. The ghost ride shots of the amorphous water formations are so characteristic
   Tarkovsky. He loves abstract nature. He’ll never stop shooting footage of
   Russian reeds billowing in the current.
7. The horse rolling after the crash is longer. It’s meaning seems more
   developed.
8. Unlike the 185 minute version, we literally watch the balloon deflate.

This whole sequence is so poetic it blows my mind. I like Yefim’s shouts of
wonder in the 185 minute version, but the extended tracking shot in the 205
minute version, into and out of the church, is much more beautiful, and the
horse seems to be fuller in this one. The sequence, to my mind, does not perhaps
need a direct meaning, except to communicate an anticipation-wonder-crash to
earth arc. The balloon’s literal trajectory is pretty clearly a narrative arc.
The horse seems to represent getting back up again; life goes on, even if the
main actor in the crash is not the one getting back up. Throughout the film we
see senseless death and misery. Life goes on.

I suppose, since the film concerns itself mostly with artists, that the key to
this sequence is the visionary-artisan in the balloon maker. His art bears him
aloft—Andrei’s idealism?—and then crashes to the ground—Andrei’s cynicism after
The Raid—before another, in the mud, struggles back to his feet—Boriska, who
helps Andrei overcome his cynicism to a place where he can produce deeply
felt—and not excessively idealistic or maudlin—art.

This is, perhaps, something that should be noted. Great art is not produced from
mandate, is not produced as didactic support of ideology, and cannot be produced
by someone who has not known suffering. As art is a reflection of nature and
life, it  must contain something of the suffering that all life has.

### The Jester
#### Summer 1400

>“I passed that birch every day and never noticed it.”

This line stands out to me every time I read it. I cannot say why. Danil’s
response

>“When you know you’ll never see it again it means something.”

Rests in the shadows compared to Andrei’s observation. It’s strangely poignant.
It’s quite inconsequential, but it resonates. In a way that’s inexplicable,
considering how throw away the concept is. It’s something that happens to us
all, quite often; we take things in front of us for granted.

Perhaps Tarkovsky had a very significant reason for including it. It certainly
made the cut.

In this scene, Tarkovsky’s rain serves such plot-importance that I am
hard-pressed to interpret it. I’m always hard-pressed to interpret Tarkovskian
rain, just like Kurosawan rain (honestly, Kurosawan rain seems less pregnant and
more tone-inducing than Tarkovskian rain, but...), but this rain is less
pregnant than typical Tarkovskian rain (e.g., the rain before Kris’s departure
in _Solaris_, where the rain serves no plot-point at all).

Tarkovksy cut the Boyar’s butt out. It changed the meaning of the women’s faces.
I figured this out earlier from supplemental features, but the cut to the
women’s faces in the little square is a reaction shot in this film. I suppose it
doesn’t actually change the meaning: the women are still shut out, but their
faces seem less somber in this film; Tarkovsky shows the Boyar’s butt with a
face in this film, and then cuts to the women’s faces as a reaction shot; in the
other film, he just cuts to their faces.

The gulf between the Jester’s imitator and the Jester is still evident. The
imitator is so low energy and untalented, and then we cut to the Jester, tired
as hell, putting a cup on his head in such an act of dada body humor that he
upstages the imitator.

Whoa, fascinating; in this film, while the Jester is outside, he shares a look
with Andrei; this is quite important, in fact, as it seems to imprint on the
Jester’s memory, which would be why, years later, he remembers Andrei’s face,
and not Kirill’s.

In both films we see a little girl staring at Andrei, mouth cracking upward into
a smile, and Andrei staring back. It recalls, in reviewing, the later scene
where Andrei is playing with the little girl, daughter to the Grand Prince, I
believe, and reciting St. Paul’s Charity Poem. Andrei has a gift with children.
Every scene he has with them is incredibly charming and engaging.

The barn scene is incredible with it’s circular sweep on the crowd. It has the
most beautiful, angelic music and shows such a scene of domestic tranquility
it’s hard not to feel nostalgic. Then we look out the window and see, what I
believe, is Kirill snitching and a drunken brawl, that’s actually less developed
in this film, and never made sense in the first.

Bird! A chicken falls from the roof when we stare at the Jester from the
perspective of the soldier. Birds _definitely_ represent souls for Tarkovsky. A
falling bird is, while perhaps not a symbol of directly-translatable meaning,
certainly pregnant _with_ meaning. We see a negative sign of a bird falling
right before we see the fall of the Jester.

Kirill slinks back into the barn after the soldiers leave. The rain stopped for
the soldiers and the main characters leave in it, then it starts back up. I am
hesitant to ever interpret Tarkovskian rain, as already noted. I would rather
not attempt it; I often worry I’m going to dip into overly-hermeneutical
interpretations; call it BDDS: Bob Dylan Derangement Syndrome. Essentially, when
you want to perform Midrash on a piece of secular art that doesn’t necessarily
warrant it.

After Kirill has performed evil, when he returns, Andrei asks “Where were you?”
with the exact same words as he _himself_ will be asked when he returns from the
Pagan ritual.

The final shot of the episode is weighty with meaning. We see the three monks
walking in a line on a muddy riverbank, four trees in the midground, and, in the
background, four soldiers (the soldiers that took the Jester) walking in a line
on a distant riverbank. The implication slaps you in the face: the monks are no
better than the soldiers. Where the soldiers terrorize with force, the monks
terrorize with spirit. It reminds me of the line in _The Seventh Seal_ where the
Knight say she is using a clever combination of knight and bishop to defeat
death.

This is, of course, one of a multitude of possible interpretations. The scene
could just as well be _contrasting_ the monks with the soldiers, but this seems
unlikely: they are visually rhyming, heading into the same direction. The trees
may even be similarly important: nature’s effects on the harvest terrorizes
people just as much as the church and the army. As well, we have the blatant
fact that Kirill has snitched on the Jester: the monks are complicit in the
evil. Kirill’s statement in the barn “God sent priests, but the devil sent
jesters” couldn’t have been more blatant on a second viewing.

### Theophanes the Greek
#### Summer-Winter-Spring-Summer 1405-1406

It’s fascinating that Kirill is the one whose face we see walking through town
and glancing toward the innocent man condemned to torture and death in the
opening of this episode. Immediately after he snitched, Tarkovsky slaps him with
his complicity in condemning an innocent man.

The inital shot of Theophanes is incredible. He’s lying on his back on a bench
and looking up toward the camera. The shot is incredibly voyeuristic, as though
we’ve just stumbled on him in a private (though not compromised) moment. I
suppose narratively he’s laying there contemplating his work in the church, but
for us, when he asks “Have you come to look?” _he’s directly asking us, the
audience_. If the entire film deals with idealism and cynicism as they relate to
the Problem of Evil, he’s implicating the audience in complicity with evil. All
we do is watch as evil takes place. It’s no mistake that Criterion chose that as
the opening shot for their trailer for the restoration. It’s a very engaging
shot and line of dialogue.

Still further, the question now makes more sense in light of the
creator/artist-motif. Artists see but do not act. They are observers above all.
The film is consistently concerned with the meaninglessness of action, and the
implication is that all the artist can do is look, observe, reflect.

Of Andrei, Kirill says

>He paints well, with subtlety, but there’s something lacking. There’s no faith,
>no awe, no faith that comes from the depths of his soul.

I’ve already commented on the need for the artist to experience suffering. This
seems to be present in this film. Only once Andrei has experienced the Raid, and
overcome the trauma, does he return to his work to produce what is truly worthy
of him.

>In much wisdom, there is much sorrow, and he who increases knowledge increases
>sorrow.

The first quote from scripture in the film is from Ecclesiastes. I’ve already
commented on how much Ecclesiastes figures in this film. It makes complete
sense, too, considering it’s inspiration to atheists and the way the film deals
with a lack of moral order, the silence of God.

>They say you paint quickly.

>I cannot work any other way. I get bored.

Wow, that’s me. I have that problem.

Kirill is very insecure in this scene. What’s fascinating is that it doesn’t
immediately come across to a Westerner as insecurity but as humility. But on the
face of it, it is clearly insecurity.

There is a shot, in this scene, that is incredibly important:

Theophanes leans against a blank white wall. It stands out starkly from the rest
of the room. He says

>I shall die soon.

Kirill:

>You shouldn’t say that

Theophanes:

>The other night I dreamed of an angel. He said “Come with me.” I said: “I shall
>die soon without you.”

The implications are far from clear. But Theophanes becomes the mentor-memory to
Andrei. I have (and will again) commented on the importance of the scene where
Andrei talks to the dead Theophanes after the raid. But this shot is absolutely
important, absolutely consciously framed and staged. The white is blinding.

Theophanes asks Kirill has name, and then, after the answer, immediately goes to
the door and shouts at the people when they’ll finish torturing the innocent
man, accusing them all of being thoughtless sinners. The sequence of events here
is telling. Tarkovsky is really hammering Kirill with his evil act.

Cut to Kirill contemplating an icon and reciting (in his head)

>Rejoice, O young man, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth.
>Walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes but know that
>for all these God will bring thee into judgement.
>...
>Vanity of vanities, all is vanity.

This is the second quote from scripture; it is also from Ecclesiastes. In the
185 minute version this is placed after the messenger comes for Andrei. In that
film it seems like a somber contemplation where Kirill’s anger is building. In
this one, it’s simple somber contemplation.

I am unsure if this scriptural quotation is significant to the story or just
character building for Kirill. The actual quotation, lengthy, is reminiscent (in
retrospect—I know which came first) of Polonius’s speech to his son in Hamlet
(“Neither a borrower nor a lender be...”).

Andrei is very hesitant in assenting to go to Moscow to assist Theophanes. It’s
rather strange.

I am reminded repeatedly in this viewing how much greater the restored 185
minute version is. It is so beautiful. I cannot believe how well they restore
the film and audio quality.

During Kirill’s rant he makes the third quote from scripture, the first not from
Ecclesiastes: it is from, I believe, Matthew, certainly from the Gospels. It is
from the Money-Changers in the Temple passage, a scene ridiculing cynicism and
materialism.

Something interesting is the way the Father Superior confronts him, asks him to
speak his mind, says he will not be offended, then, as soon as Kirill opens his
mouth, cuts him off and calls him names. Kirill looks like “Well, I don’t know
what I expected” and walks off saying “Now do you see?” I cannot tell whether
this is Tarkovsky’s gag or the Father Superior’s gag. I am inclined to believe
it is Tarkovsky’s gag. The Father Superior seems legitimately to think he can
listen to Kirill’s bullshit and then totally does not.

In truth, the scene is brilliantly acted by Kirill’s performer.

Then he beats the dog. The dog makes very unrealistic noises. It sounds more
like a rabbit. Thank God Tarkovsky didn’t hurt the dog. It seems to have been
able to play dead.

Cut scene to the forest, Andrei and Foma.

What’s fascinating is how often it’s made clear that Andrei is a promising
student, and not yet a true painter.

We see a snake on screen at the same time Andrei is commenting on Foma’s
mythomania (I looked for a synonym to pathalogical lying that would be as
effective as, say, kleptomania; mythomania is it; I wish their was a word
similar to decapitation or defenestration or for the gouging out of eyes; the
closest we seem to be able to get is self-enucleation/autoenucleation/oedipism;
enucleation seems to be primarily concerned with surgery, and not violence. I
will use it however, even if the etymological meaning is somewhat removed from
eyes). Initially I thought it was simply commenting on Andrei’s ability to
observe beauty in all of nature (perhaps that _is_ the point) but the snake is
significantly paired with Foma’s mythomania, in the same way the dead swan is
paired with his dawning realization fo his own soul later in the scene. It
stands all the more out because Andrei calls Foma’s attention to it before it
slithers away saying “Look, Foma, look.” In other words, look at your own soul,
Foma, but he doesn’t see it.

>“Whatever Theophanes says, I can see blue colors better than anyone else.”

Exactly, Foma. All you see is color, no meaning. Surface.

I am still confused about what this scene is. Specifically how Theophanes fits
into it. He’s randomly in the forest in bare feet with ants or maggots or
something crawling up his legs. It seems to be a symbol of death, which has been
hanging over him this entire time. But it is very abstract and eerie.

The way Theophanes boxes Foma’s ears is strange. Theophanes describes him as a
dog and prescribes beating. Then we see Foma recognize his soul (a dead swan)
for the first time.

New eerie shot and score: more abstract ghost rides over swampy water. The dust
on the film mirrors it.

The context of the argument between Andrei and Theophanes gets a little (a
precious little) more context here. Andrei seems to have observed something of
Russian women giving up their hair to soldiers, Theophanes doesn’t understand
how he saw it when everyone else was only concerned for themselves. I still have
no idea what it was. But we’re reinforcing Andrei’s observant, altruistic, and
idealistic nature.

So far as I can tell scripture is not quoted in this scene but it seems that
Theophanes quotes _something_.

They seem to quote scripture to each other, but I cannot tell. The only thing I
can identify is “All is vanity and ashes,” a paraphrase of the famous line from
Ecclesiastes.

Most interesting in this conversation is Theophanes’ “Everything is an eternal
circle and it repeats and repeats itself” which is very Ecclesiastes (“And the
sun also rises”).

One of the commentaries I’ve read identifies the Jesus character in the Passion
Play as Kirill. I don’t see it. He seems to be another actor entirely. There is
a wide shot in the passion play of a field of workers with rickety fencing. It
reminds me quite a lot of some of the Dutch masters, specifically it draws to my
mind Pieter Bruegel the Elder’s The Hunters in the Snow, though there are marked
differences and the subject is nothing like it. There are similarities to other
Bruegel paintings, especially the snowscapes. We know that The Hunters in the
Snow was a reference for Tarkovsky in _Solaris_ (it’s featured as a painting on
the wall in the dining(?) room of the Solaris station and Tarkovksy gives us a
good long look at it in the thematic center of the film, the birthday dinner
party and anti-gravity scene), as well as other Bruegel’s and even Rembrandt. It
seems Tarkovsky very much liked the rustic simplicity of the Dutch masters.
Indeed, _Andrei Rublev_ revolves around such images. Interestingly, during this
passion play sequence Rublev compares the tribulations of the peasantry to
Christ’s tribulations.

There is a rather peculiar and significant shot during the passion play: Christ
is sitting despondent on the ground and picks up a snowball and takes a bite.
It’s very non-sequitur, and any time there’s a non-sequitur, it seems
significant.

Mary Magdelene is incredibly angelic in this. The way the light plays in her
hair she almost has a halo. A smiling child watches Christ walk to his death.
There are no sad children in this film.

Cut back to Foma listening. Tarkovsky’s favorite reeds flowing in the current,
paint speckle. The reeds always look like a woman’s hair. There is an
interesting contrast between the flowing of the reeds and the flowing of the
cloth at the beginning of the passion play. From a white cloth to white paint
speckles. There’s mirror to it. An eternal recurrence, as Theophanes notes. Foma
is being spiritually elevated.

### The Holiday
#### Spring 1408

The score to this episode is very discordant and eerie. It plays to the
unearthliness of the Pagans. They fascinate. They remind me of Picts. A people
of the Earth who have parished from the Earth. Simple, innocent people. Tribal
people. Tribal people always have a sort of fierce unconscious nature. An
archetypal nature. As though they represent our passions and impulses.

Nightingales. This tracking shot is really incredible in the scheme of things.
Falling birds. We’re about to see Andrei’s sin. This really needs restoration.
It’s practically black. Four falling birds, one flying across the screen. Andrei
falls to temptation, to sin. His soul is hurt a little. His robe catches fire as
he watches Marfa have sex. Wow, the desire is symbolized.

Horse in the water during the funereal ritual, splashing the water with his
hoof. If horses symbolize life and pagans symbolize desire, we see some
interesting motifs. Marfa keeps climing up a ladder and dropping down through
smoke. There is so much hefty archetypal symbolism in here. Andrei is threatened
with a rock sinking in the water. So much downward symbolism. Andrei is
crucified. But his right hand hangs down, his leeft hand hangs up. Someone said
he _probably_ has sex with Marfa, but the narrative never seems to allow for it.

Marfa expresses a very simple creed of love: all love is love, how can it be
wrong. There is a repeated interest in the goodness of simplicity. Kirill claims
Andrei paints with great subtlety (complexity) but then praises Theophanes for
his “simplicity, without gaudiness.” Andrei’s complex moral journey stands in
stark contrast to the simplicity of everyone around him, including Durochka, the
holy fool, later in the film and Foma, who never examines his own soul. Idealism
is often depicted as simplicity, but, perhaps, Tarkovsky is saying, idealism is
far from simple. I have personally been very idealistic and I have known many
who were similarly idealistic and become cynical. It is not a simple journey but
a highly reflective and complex journey. Cf. _All the King’s Men_, which uses a
commentary on philosophical idealism and philosophical materialism to show the
journey in the main character from political idealism to political cynicism.

Andrei Rublev is crucified with love!

Andrei tears through the forest in a personal moral forest. He gets scratches on
his face while he navigates his inner moral turmoil. Marfa watches him with
lust(?), fascination(?). He is a modern man. She is an ancient type.

We see an old woman wipe a tear from her face as Andrei walks behind her. There
is something to that but I do not know what. Then we see Andrei walk toward
horses, the symbol of life according to Wikipedia.

“Where were you?” the same words as Andrei asked Kirill. He’s asked twice.

>These forests are impenetrable. I am all scratched. The local people like it.
>They are accustomed to it. For people, everything is a matter of custom. Old
>people don’t need to think for they pass their days by custom. But perhaps they
>consciously enjoy the way the days drag on.

The sacrificial canoe from the pagan funereal ritual bumps into their boat.

There is a contrast here between Andrei’s inner life and everyone else’s. It is
the artist’s need for deeper exploration of life. Nothing is surface for an
artist. Nothing is custom.

Then we watch Marfa and her boyfriend Fyodor chased to the riverbank, persecuted
by Christian soldiers while the monks watch in horror. The old woman is ecstatic
about it. The pagan man practically dances into the water trying to escape, but
the soldiers beat him savagely. It resembles the happy way the Jester went to
his fate. Then Marfa escapes naked into the river. She seems to swim right next
to Andrei’s boat. They completely ignore her.

I think the alliance between the religious and the militaristic is beginning to
wear on the religious.

It is shattered eventually.

### The Last Judgement
#### Summer 1408

The acting of many of these peasant characters is fascinating. The way they
move, talk, and look reminds me so heavily of people in prison. It’s nothing
like the people I grew up with and live with now. Both the Jester and now the
messenger at the end of this scene are straight types. Their movement, speech,
and facial expressions are all types I’ve seen. The way ignorant perform and
communicate.

The conversation with Andrei and Danil in the road in the field of flowers is
where we see the ultimate expression of Andrei’s idealism: “I can’t paint all
that, it disgusts me. I don’t want to terrify people. Understand me, Danil.”
Danil is practical, Andrei is idealistic. Then we see the horse messenger
travelling, I presume to carry message that they haven’t even started the
painting yet, for Andrei’s lack of inspiration “I don’t know what to paint”
because he cannot paint a typical Last Judgement.

White walls. White. The most imposing color to an artist. Blank canvas. Blank
paper.

Foma has grown, but is still selfish. He leaves for his own project.

Ah, we quote scripture now:

>When I was a child, I spake as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a
>child...

We’re quoting from just after the charity poem. I Chronicles chapter 13. I
suppose we bleed into the scene with the little girl. A beautiful scene.  His
dejection at lack of inspiration turns into delight at the innocence of
children.

The Grand Prince actually seems human here. It’s the first we see him. He’s in a
room of flowing flowers. The particulate creates a heavenly atmosphere with the
all white walls. There is a reference to birds singing. The art is magnificent,
it makes the soul sing. Those in power live in beauty and while they make the
lives of peasants unbearable. The dumb nurse-man that’s holding the scrambling
child (a sign of the man’s evil ignorance in contrast to Andrei’s ease with
children) comments that the white (a symbol of purity) should be painted over
with stronger colors. He doesn’t respect the integrity of artists. They refuse
to repaint it because they must go to Zvenigorod to work for his brother. They
comment that the stone is better. The rivalry between the Grand Prince and his
Princely brother is made clear.

Interestingly, stonemason’s work in the Grand Prince’s mansion is compromised by
the Grand Prince’s cheapness on the stone, and the Prince’s mansion is
compromised by the Grand Prince’s jealousness, violently enucleating (I know! I
got to use the word!) the stonemasons as they journey to the Prince’s mansion.
Art is compromised by those in power to their own selfish ends. The dumb
nurse-man says the art only serves to glorify the Grand Prince. How artists are
prostituted in the service of those in power.

Andrei cleans an icon of St. George defeating the dragon as the soldiers of the
Grand Prince gather and take off to enucleate the stonemasons. This is the same
symbol that appears on the bell at the end of the film. What is the dragon?
Cynicism?

The symbol of hte oedipism is very profound. Having reflected what they had
seen, they now can no longer see. The Grand Prince didn’t murder them, which he
likely wouldn’t have felt any worse (if bad at all) about doing, but blinded
them (they are likely to die in the forest anyway). Then the lead soldier says
he cannot find his whip (a symbol of violence and subjugation) and asks if
anyone has _seen_ his whip. This is all almost Freudian. Only Piotr escapes with
his eyes. Snow begins to fall. A stream of white paint pours into the water in a
Tarkovskian long take. Then we see red paint splattered on a white wall in
anger. White paint flowing into a black background, then black (red?) paint
violently thrown onto a white background.

More quotes from Paul. This one is the passage that subjugates women, talking
about the head of the church, the head of woman, etc. Fascinatingly, it is
recited when Andrei asks the boy to recite anything from the Bible. Unless
Andrei actively seeks a passage, the result is something profoundly cynical and
detestable. It’s recited as we meet Durchoka, the Holy fool. She has a sore on
her lip throughout the movie until the end of the film. She appears now in very
rustic brown clothing, where later she will appear in virginal white. The
contrast between the Biblical passage and the innocent beauty of Durochka is
interesting. When she cries at the splattered paint, we see such a pure
aesthetic reaction it’s hard not to recognize the soul that Andrei would like to
have around.

Why do we see a trinity of monks on a muddy road in the rain? It seems to be a
memory of earlier times, when they left the monastery the first time. Kirill has
a black bird he is petting (his fragile, dark ego). Andrei realizes that his
Last Judgement will be a feast. He seems to be reacting against the passage that
is subjugating women by observing Durochka. “She is not a sinner, even if she
does not wear a scarf.” And then he runs out into the Tarkovskian rain.
Honestly, that seems about as straight a play of rain symbols as Tarkovsky gets.
He’s being cleansed here.

Though there’s thunder, a foreshadowing of the raid to come. And Durochka
fingers her lip sore before heading out into the rain herself. All this seems
highly portentous. The lip sore is definitely added, and symbolizes Durochka’s
impairments or deformities. It is curious though, that it is a symbol that
disappears _after_ she goes away with the Tatar and is returned to a virginal
state. This film seems to praise maturity and detest ignorant innocence, except
in the form of children? And pagans? I’m at a loss on Durochka’s lip sore.

## The Passion According to Andrei
## Part II

### The Raid
#### Autumn 1408

The most exposition of the rivalry between the Grand Prince and the Prince is
here.

I don’t fully understand why they attack Vladimir, what strategic importance it
serves. The Grand Prince is in Lithuania and the town isn’t garrisoned. But it
doesn’t necessarily give the Prince the throne.

Horse legs traipsing through a stream, splashing it about. Symbols of portending
death here. The use of life to take life?

I wonder how they shot the flashback for the Prince, since the same actor played
both princes.

There is something homoerotic in the way they kiss, and I don’t think it’s
anachronistic to read it that way. And one of the two Princes stands on the
other’s feet.

In this version that section is moved. The flashback is broken up. Or perhaps
not even shown? I’m literally watching the raid unfold now and haven’t seen the
conclusion to the flashback. Or perhaps I’m misremembering how it unfolded in
the 185 minute version.

The battle is strangely slow and lazy. It is not fast paced at all. There is
quite a nonchalance in the soldiers.

Burning cow. It was covered in asbestos in the making, so wasn’t actually
harmed. A woman speared in the bowels, as though for sport.

Ah, here is the conclusion to the flashback, in the midst of the raid, while the
Prince is reflecting. Ah, the flashback takes place at the same church? THere is
a melee in which the Grand Prince beats the...

The narrative is as confused here as in the 185 minute version. It’s a 2 level
flashback.

1. The prince is reflecting in the midst of the battle on 
2. Flashback, his reconciliation ceremony with the Grand Prince outside the
   square cathedral where he looks up at the church spire and remembers
3. Flashback, a melee contest between the Prince and the Grand Prince outside a
   (the same?) cathedral. The Grand Prince kicks the crap out of the Prince,
   repeatedly stomping his face into the snow with his boot. The Grand Prince is
   then praised by those around him.
4. Break that flashback to the reconciliation ceremony where the grand prince
   arrives with a significantly larger entourage. They enter the church, the
   Grand Prince’s hand tenderly on the Prince’s shoulder as they enter.
5. Break that flashback and return to the raid.

Falling chickens. I’m telling you, every bird is significant. Foma is being
chased through flying and falling and pecking chickens. There is cowardice in
the way Foma is interacting witht he soldiers. I do not know if chickens
represent cowardice in Russian culture.

Chickens flying at the soldiers. A downed horse struggling with its owner. A
struggling woman about to be raped being dragged by her hair. The pounding of
the cathedral’s door with a breaching log. This represents the final breach
between the religious and the militaristic I’ve been talking about. The
militaristic betray the religious.

We keep focusing on horses. As the cathedral is being seiged we pan from a
cavalier and content Tatar commander to his black horse’s head to the Prince’s
conflicted face (where we hear the Tatar commander ask the prince if he is sorry
about the cathedral) to the Prince’s white horse, where we sit. There seems to
be a representation fo the Prince’s emotional attitude toward the whole raid
here, and the cathedral is the pivot point. He seems to be seeing the raid as
wrong when it blasphemes.

Now we see the actual death of an actual horse, that they’ve stabbed, and now it
falls to the ground, struggles to get up, bleeds out, and is shot off camera.
Nope, they pan back. Man, they let this horse seriously struggle. God that was
awful.

An old woman’s face, terrified, in the cathedral.

A nervous Durochka.

Andrei.

They breach the cathedral.

A man enucleated.

The Prince looks regretful as he observes this violence.

Here’s Andrei killing the Tatar to save Durochka just above the frame.

The Tatar is asking about Christ, and the Prince seems reluctant to talk about
it. The Tatar cannot understand the sacred. The Prince is observing the censers.
Meanwhile a man is being tortured as we watch the sacred censers rock. The
censers appear golden. There’s hefty symbolism here in this scene.

The Prince stands directly in front of a swinging, burning censer and smirks
while we listen to the screams of an innocent man being tortured for material
gain.

You can’t tell me that’s not symbolic.

The Prince loses his smirk, looks downcast, and regrets all this.

Now we have the end of the reconciliation. The homoerotic kiss, and the Grand
Prince, I believe, is standing on the Prince’s toes. I can’t tell completely.
There is something _autoerotic_ in the homoeroticism. Those in power are
concerned only for themselves, and they do battle with themselves, in ways that
hurt everyone else.

The man has molten metal poured in his mouth. I am curious what the symbol is.
The strongest (symbolically-speaking) material on earth is melted and poured
into the mouth of a Priest. Materialism silences the Spirit.

The Prince climbs stairs, regretful, downcast, and observes what he’s unleashed
on the Russian peasantry in the name of rivalry. It’s a King Lear moment. We see
the two geese flutter down to the ground. His soul is descending. The scene is
shot in slow motion; it is more perceptual than straight time.

The types of birds seem to correspond to the people. Andrei is a dove, closest
to the Holy Ghost. The Jester was a chicken, as is Foma. The chicken is the most
peasant-like bird. The most domestic, pedestrian. The Prince is a goose, a
kingly bird, somewhat tyrannical (ever met a nice goose?).

In the cathedral, while we observe Andrei, there is a slinking black cat that
scurries by him. I cannot interpret it. Durochka braids a dead woman’s hair.
That is an incredible touch. Theophanes pages through a burnt Bible. The
ultimate symbol of the destruction of faith.

Andrei tells of a highly symbolic dream: the Tatars destroying his faith and
idealism while Theophanes, the cynical character in the beginning, stands by.

Theophanes rejects cynicism here.

>You are wrong now, I was wrong then.

Andrei is profoundly shaken by his first sight of cynical evil. Who is Seryoga?
The horse?

Theophanes:

>Through our sins, evil has assumed human form. Encroaching evil means
>encroaching humanity. God will forgive you, don’t forgive yourself. Live,
>between divine forgiveness and your own torment. As for your sins, what do your
>scriptures say? “Learn to do good: seek justice, rebuke the oppressor, devend
>the fatherless, plead for the widow. Come now, and let us reason together,
>saith the Lord though your sins be as scarlet they shall be as white as snow.”

Interesting. This is from Isaiah. I always wonder how Tarkovsky picks his
scripture. Does the book from which it is chosen have as much importance as the
words of the passage? I think not, and the reason he has chosen so much from
Ecclesiastes is because that has been so impactful on him. This passage’s place
may simply be that it is a pure statement of justice, and it coming now is the
result of Andrei’s profound cynicism at this point in the story. The philosophy
Theophanes is expressing, in it’s full expression, is that we seek justice
_because_ evil is inextricable from humanity. Yes, there is no end to our goal
of justice. But must there always be an end of suffering?

Andrei:

>Our mother country suffers all, she will endure all. But how long will this go
>on?

Theophanes:

>I don’t know. Forever, most likely. Yet how beautiful all this is.

They look up at the beauty of the cathedral.

Theophanes:

>It is snowing.

Andrei:

>Nothing is more terrible than snow falling in a temple.

A riderless horse enters the cathedral.

Holy Christ.

Andrei, to answer your question, considering Vladimir Putin, the
answer is the one Theophanes gave: forever. This is Tarkovsky’s point. Eternal
recurrence. Suffering is inextricable from life. Buddhistic, to be honest.

It’s fascinating that this is the spirit of the film, the theme. That beauty is
borne of suffering, that evil is inextricable from life. It’s something I’ve
often reflected on.

### The Charity
#### Winter 1412

I don’t remember this sequence, and it isn’t mentioned in the Wikipedia.

Durochka (still unnamed in the film)...

I think this was renamed in the 185 minute version to Silence.

Durochka finds apples and eats them. Andrei makes her spit them out. I don’t get
why. I assume they’re rotten? She pouts. As Andrei drives the apple fragments
into the ground, Durochka comes over and does it with him, laughing. Andrei pets
her hair. Poignant.

>The apples are all rotten.

The arrival of Kirill. You definitely begin to feel like there should be a
reunion of the three, even though it never happens.

Kirill, a master speaker, draws on the New Testament to seek acceptance back
into the Monastery: “Father, let your prodigal son return.” The Father Superior
should be unable to deny him, if he knows and respects his scripture. The whole
point of the scripture is radical forgiveness. It is a testament to his
obstinate hypocracy that he refuses at first. Is this intentional? I do not
know, but no atheist who has read the Bible carefully can ever fail to notice
the hypocracy ever present in the faithful concerning this sort of thing.

There’s a random midget here, and I don’t see any significance.

And now we have the return of the Tatars.

Andrei tries to carry a scalding rock to the water (presumably to warm it) but
drops it at the last possible second.

When Durochka sees the Tatars she touches her lip sore.

The Tatars encourage the dogs to fight over scraps, laughing. Obvious depiction
of their cruelty.

Durochka’s interest in her reflection in the Tatar commander’s breastplate is
rather interesting. Something is happening within her. Where Foma’s recognition
of his soul is depicted as his examining of a dead swan symbolic of his soul,
Foma is _literally_ seeing herself for the first time (she has probably never
seen a mirror). I think she is here first gaining some form of basic material
self-consciousness. It may be merely material self-consciousness, as distinct
from spiritual self-consciousness, but it is self-consciousness, and _it is an
elevation_. She then prances in a Tatar blanket, a symbol of vanity, while
Andrei tries to drag her away, and she spits in his face. There is a dawning
consciousness in this, like a teenager, just before she leaves with the Tatars.

Wikipedia makes discussion of the yuridivy phenomenon (Russian holy fool) in the
Foolishness for Christ page. I am going to read it and make commetn.

I have commented extensively on the irony and symbolic meaning of Durochka going
with the Tatars at the end of this scene.

Isaiah is said to have been a holy fool.

From the Wikipedia:

>The Holy Fool or yuródivyy (юродивый) is the Russian version of foolishness for
>Christ, a peculiar form of Eastern Orthodox asceticism. The yurodivy is a Holy
>Fool, one who acts intentionally foolish in the eyes of men. The term implies
>behaviour "which is caused neither by mistake nor by feeble-mindedness, but is
>deliberate, irritating, even provocative."[8]
>
>**In his book Holy Fools in Byzantium and Beyond, Ivanov described "holy fool" as
>a term for a person who "feigns insanity, pretends to be silly, or who provokes
>shock or outrage by his deliberate unruliness." [8] He explained that such
>conduct qualifies as holy foolery only if the audience believes that the
>individual is sane, moral, and pious. The Eastern Orthodox Church holds that
>holy fools voluntarily take up the guise of insanity in order to conceal their
>perfection from the world, and thus avoid praise.[8]**

This directly challenges the holy fool status of Durochka. She is very much
mentally incapacitated.

>Some characteristics that were commonly seen in holy fools were going around
>half-naked, being homeless, speaking in riddles, being believed to be
>clairvoyant and a prophet, and occasionally being disruptive and challenging to
>the point of seeming immoral (though always to make a point).
>
>Ivanov argued that, unlike in the past, modern yurodivy are generally aware
>that they look pathetic in others’ eyes. They strive to pre-empt this contempt
>through exaggerated self-humiliation, and following such displays they let it
>be known both that their behaviors were staged and that their purpose was to
>disguise their superiority over their audience.[8]
>
>Fools for Christ are often given the title of Blessed (блаженный), which does
>not necessarily mean that the individual is less than a saint, but rather
>points to the blessings from God that they are believed to have acquired.
>
>The Eastern Orthodox Church records Isidora Barankis of Egypt (d. 369) among
>the first Holy Fools. However, the term was not popularized until the coming of
>Symeon of Emesa, who is considered to be a patron saint of holy fools.[2][9] In
>Greek, the term for Holy Fool is salos.
>
>The practice was recognised in the hagiography of fifth-century Byzantium, and
>**it was extensively adopted in Muscovite Russia, probably in the 14th century.
>The madness of the Holy Fool was ambiguous, and could be real or simulated. He
>(or she) was believed to have been divinely inspired**, and was therefore able
>to say truths which others could not, normally in the form of indirect
>allusions or parables...

This directly supports the holy fool status of Durochka. In fact, the reference
to the 14th century in Muscovite Russia further reinforces it (_Andrei Rublev_
takes place in the early 1400’s, the very beginning of the 15th century. This
Wikipedia is deeply flawed. It needs more citations.

>...He had a particular status in regard to the Tsars, as a figure not subject
>to earthly control or judgement.

Interesting, this bit. If this is the case, then Durochka has an interesting
place in the context of the film.

A quote in the Wikipedia:

>The Holy is too great and too terrible when encountered directly for men of
>normal sanity to be able to contemplate it comfortably. Only those who cannot
>care for the consequences run the risk of the direct confrontation of the Holy.

This is a fascinating explanation. It reminds me of Arthur Bradley’s description
of why the fool in King Lear is constantly speaking in pregnant riddles.

>In the film Andrei Rublev, a jurodivyj character, "Durochka," is played by
>director Andrei Tarkovsky’s wife Irma Raush. The Stalker from the film Stalker,
>also by Tarkovsky, can be identified as a holy fool.

Alright, I am going to say this right now: the character Durochka is referred to
on screen as a holy fool. That does not mean she is _actually_ a holy fool. It
is rather fascinating at this point to note how all of the literature I have
encountered on this film thus far (a) refers to her as a holy fool without
question and (b) names her Durochka. I am over two thirds of the way through the
long version of the film and I have yet to see her named Durochka and I have yet
to see any direct evidence that she is anything more than a simpleton. Where
does the name Durochka come from? Is she actually a holy fool or just a
simpleton? What is the deal!?

### The Bell
#### Spring-Summer-Autumn-Winter-Spring 1423-1424

Already with the opening of The Bell do we have a bird symbol and a horse
symbol. There is a rooster in the window next to Boriska. As I’ve already said,
the kind of bird represents the kind of person.

Repeatedly a horse’s muddy rump keeps re-entering the frame to the left of
Boriska. There’s something ignobly symbolic in this. A horse is (supposedly) a
symbol of life. Here we have a symbol of the butt of life. I’m just guessing on
this. I’ve also seen tell that horses are such a complex symbol in this film
that you have to interpret them afresh each time. I have no idea.
