# Sun Dec  2 15:17:23 EST 2018
## Andrei Tarkovksy's _Offret_

We have in this case Tarkovsky's last film, from 1986, in Swedish. So we have a
film in Swedish made by a Soviet exile. Expat may be more accurate.

As with all Tarkovksy films, it's more cinematic than most films I've ever seen
in my life. It began with a ten minute long take! In it they discuss Nietzsche
(to some extent), eternal recurrence, and the feeling that we're all just
waiting for life to begin. Before that, he was planting a dead tree and talking
about the power of consistent rituals.

Already we're talking about metaphor and symbol. Eternal recurrence is often
misunderstood philosophically as the concept of the world's history starting
over again repeatedly. This is wrong. Eternal recurrence happens throughout
history. Every time a child is born, that child experiences the same things his
parents experienced: he grows up, gets bullied or bullies, plays, loses his
innocence, finds a girl, marries her, has chidren, and the cycle repeats itself
again. This is eternal recurrence.

Another aspect to eternal recurrence is in politics and history. History may not
repeat itself, but it does rhyme (as Twain is said to have said) and _this_ is
also eternal recurrence. We're watching America and Europe go through the same
things they've gone through before.

Later on, we hear this line:

>Every gift involves some sacrifice.

The title of the film. We're dealing with:

1. Eternal recurrenced
2. Old age and youth
3. The gift of sacrifice

We're clearly in the realm of a story involving the way parents sacrifice
themselves for their children and the way the archetype of parental sacrifice
repeats itself.

The Wikipedia needs expansion. Their summary does not mention the dead tree or
the philosophical dialogue that opens the film.

Tarkovksy always needs repeated viewing. I'm going to have to rewatch this one
(as well as Solaris and Stalker).

Eventually I'm going to have to purchase the reset of his filmography.

The dress of the women reminds me of Ibsen, the painting “The Awakening
Conscience” by William Holman Hunt, and just general late nineteenth century
dress. Perhaps a few Singer Sargent portraits of society ladies. The map of
Europe circa 1600 (which I thought had significantly more accurate coastlines
than they suggest in the film) is another clear temporal displacement.

These things are all being used to convey the timelessness of this story.

Quotations and references to Hamlet, Richard III, and The Idiot. The main
character is called Prince Myshkin multiple times. He _played_ Prince Myshkin.

If Prince Myshkin is a holy fool, Richard III is his polar opposite, a conniving
satanist. The main character in the film therefore played polar opposite
characters; this is an indication of the main character's duality.

The main character is profoundly pessimistic. He also implies in one scene that
he gave up acting because he simultaneously could not stand to impersonate
another and became ashamed of presenting honesty on stage. These are
contradictory.

Something fascinating is how hysterical the woman is at the outbreak of WWIII.
Also interesting is the fact that in 1986 this was a real fear. I'm not so
worried about such a thing. It seems like a science fiction to me.

Tarkovsky is supposed to have always had a book in his hand; he read more than
any of his friends. We have in one shot a clear example of someone who (a)
understood the history of the concept of hysteria and (b) understood how to
craft a scene of a woman's hysteria such that it appears to be an authentic
Freudian example. And now we have a man injecting a young girl with a sedative.
This is actually a major development.
