Thu Nov  8 08:29:03 EST 2018
----------------------------
Andrei Tarkovsky’s _Андрей Рублёв_
==================================
185 minute version
------------------

This is the third Tarkovsky film I’ve seen now, and I must conclude, after some
initial reticence, that Tarkovsky is in my Pantheon of Personal Auteurs. (Please
note, however, that my PoPA is somewhat limited currently; it will grow).

_Andrei Rublev_ has been called "the best art-house film of all time" by The
Guardian, and a Google search for "best arthouse films" indeed returns _Andrei
Rublev_ as first (despite the first webpage returned, Rotten Tomatoes’ Top 100
Art House & International Movies, not even listing it).

The film is enigmatic. It is perhaps both more avant-garde than _Solaris_ and
less so than _Stalker_, but it is considerably more perplexing and difficult
than either of those. But it is also far more magnificent.

Filmed in ultra wide 2.35:1 in black and white, save for five minutes of detail
shots of the real Andrei Rublev’s paintings at the very end of the film, it is
considerably more cinematic and easier to watch than the
claustrophobic-though-gorgeously-textured 1.37:1 _Stalker_. It is filmed, cast,
and constructed more like a midcentury David Lean epic than like the Tarkovsky
I’ve seen thus far. But it does not give a fig for throwing the audience a rope.
It is not interested in conventional audience handholding in it’s character
development or labeling, and the actual plot and action of the film occurs
with very little exposition. It is a film you are meant to watch repeatedly to
grasp. I watched the first third twice and followed along with the Wikipedia’s
description of the plot (which I plan to improve this weekend; Wikipedia plot
summaries are always terse, difficult, and misleading).

I had a great deal of difficulty _interpreting_ it, much more so than the other
two Tarkovsky’s I’ve seen: where _Solaris_ seems to be nearly exclusively about
the power of memory and nostalgia (with subtle side themes, like the reality of
replicas), and where _Stalker_ seems to be nearly exclusively about faith in a
material society (as well as, perhaps, commentary on the nature of
consiousness), _Andrei Rublev_ is a very discursive film, that concerns itself
with the nature of creative types, faith, violence, and corruption. It quotes
from scripture at length and often, utilizes subtle symbolism (or “imagery” as
Tarkovsky takes pains to call it) in multitudinous ways (a horse means one thing
at the beginning, another in the middle, and still another at the end), and
shows life in the middle ages in more facets than Bergman (of whom, along with
Kurosawa, Tarkovsky expressed such admiration as to declare those two his only
audience) seemed able to in his masterpiece _The Seventh Seal_.

Since the film is so multi-faceted and resists easy analysis and summary, I will
discuss each of the seven episodes in course (please note, seven, not three or
five).

Prologue
--------

The beginning of the film, the prologue, was one of the most entrancing, perhaps
“lyrical”—as film critics are wont to call beauty in cinema—sequences I’ve ever
seen in film. The scene depicts a man—who is he? a proto-scientist? an
adventurer?—take off in a hot air balloon, experiencing flight for the first
time in his—humanity’s?—history, escaping from a mob of ignorant, presumably
religious, peasants, who clearly want to prevent the witchcraft they’ve heard is
transpiring from taking place. His shouts of joy are delightful. We experience
the childlike innocence of wonder at an experience humanity has long since
become inured to. Then the balloon pops, the man shouts, and he crashes to the
ground. The shot freezes. We can assume he is dead. Cut to a horse on laying on
its back climb to its feet and trot off.

What the hell does the horse mean? We see a lengthy sequence of rise and fall.
From such heights of hope do we crash to the ground. Perhaps this is the story
of faith. Perhaps this is the arc of the film. Whatever the sequence means, it
is a _very_ moving, and shocking, introduction to the themes of the film.

The horse is clearly significant, though quite enigmatic. Wikipedia claims it’s
a symbol of life. Perhaps it’s a symbol of _continuing_. The air balloon rises,
crashes, the horse “gets back up.”

Already we seem to be dealing with similar symbolism to _Stalker_: unconsciously
created and unconsciously moving. It resists easy analysis.

I. The Jester (Summer 1400)
---------------------------

We meet Andrei and his two fellow monk-artists: Danil (Daniil Chorny according
to Wikipedia, a contemporary icon painter to the real Andrei Rublev) and Kirill,
who seems to be entirely fictional. The Wikipedia says they each represent
creative types: Andrei, the observant humanist (think of, perhaps, Balzac, or
any other writer who keeps a notebook to jot down snippets of conversation for
use in their art; an artist that must have inspiration and is constantly looking
for it); Danil, an artist “more concerned with self-realization than
creativity”; and Kirill, a capricious, envious, self-righteous artist who, by
his own words, lacks any real talent—save for the last quality, I’d think of
Picasso.

The three take shelter in a barn where a jester, or, in Russian, skomorkh, is
performing for the peasants. He’s rather a fascinating character. First, his act
is rather obnoxious. It reminded me quite a bit of some of the behavior of
jokers in prison, and I realized how timeless that behavior is. He shouts and
jumps and bangs on a sort of drum. His story is rather uninspired (this seems
intentional), a juvenile bawdy tale of a Boyar (a Slavic lord) who shaves his
beard, resulting in his face looking like his ass and his wife failing to
recognize him.

Women are shown on screen, briefly, during the bawdy tale, framed in a very
small window. The first thing I notice is that the room is full of men and all
the women are crowded either outside or in an antechamber and watching through
this little window. The gender discrepancy is palapable. The framing of the
women in tiny rectangular frame cries imprisonment.

After the tale, the jester, drops to the ground, tired, and an old man tries to
imitate the act and is ignored by the crowd, because he’s clearly not as
energetic or interesting as the jester. To prove this, the jester puts a cup on
his head, upside down, like a hat, a moment of Chaplinesque body humor that
upstages the old man imitating him even while he’s dead tired. This whole
sequence, again, is very true to life in my own experience of
“personality-types.” (Honestly, people may criticize personality type systems,
but I’ve found throughout my life, with or without personality systems, that
there _are_ absolutely recurring types of people—perhaps not everyone can be
typed, but many can, and they stand out as obvious quite often.)

The jester gets up and goes out into the rain, climbs up above the doorway and
hangs down, still monkeying around, (it’s just before this, after the jester has
concluded his tale, that Andrei and his companions are noticed in the doorway);
a drunken fight transpires in the rain, seemingly over some dispute about
adultery; and finally, a group of soldiers arrive and demand the jester come
with them.

The jester walks toward them, hiding a musical instrument behind his
back (some sort of strange lute-like object). When the soldiers turn their back
the jester surreptitiously hands the instrument to one of the people in the
crowd. The jester, smiling, is dragged outside and slammed against a tree so
that he falls unconscious. He is thrown onto a horse. One of the soldiers comes
back inside, looks into the crowd, clearly for the instrument, demands it, takes
it outside, and smashes it. Then they leave.

This entire soldier sequence is unsettlingly true to life. It generates a
prison-like atmosphere. I am recalling, at the moment of this writing, that
Kirill is suspiciously from midway through the bawdy tale, and admits to Andrei
at the end of the film that he turned in the jester. This didn’t make sense
until now. I had thought the soldiers had already been looking for the jester;
no, Kirill heard the bawdy tale ridiculing a Boyar, left, told the soldiers, and
caused them to take the jester. Prick.

All this has shocking versimilitude.

One thing I found strange in this entire scene was how bright the light was in
the barn. It seemed to me there wasn’t a roof.

After Andrei and his companions leave, when the rain has stopped, they walk
through the woods in a line. The rain begins to fall again. In the distance,
across the water, we see a visual rhyme: the soldiers carrying the jester are
walking in exactly the same way, in exactly the same direction, parallel to our
characters. This seems to be a pretty explicit comparison.

II. Theophanes the Greek (Summer-Winter-Spring-Summer 1405-1406)
----------------------------------------------------------------

The episode opens with a town square where a man is professing his innocence
before being tortured and executed. Cut to Kirill entering a cathedral and
meeting Theophanes, a significant character (eventual mentor to Andrei). We see
moments of Theophanes causing Kirill’s envy to spike, and moments of Kirill’s
insecurity, but the scene seems largely significant for the fact that Kirill
agrees to be Theophanes assistant in Moscow if Theophanes comes himself to their
monastery to ask Kirill to join him, purely to show up Andrei.

The next scene, at the monastery, a messenger from Theophanes asks for
_Andrei’s_ assistance. Tarkovsky has Andrei reticent at first, before assenting.
Then he asks Danil for _his_ assistance, but Danil refuses. Andrei is stunned,
and begs along Foma, Piotr, and someone else; of the three, Foma is the most
significant character.

A few days later Andrei goes to Danil, reading the bible, to say farewell, and
expresses his admiration for the man and how helpless he is without him (“I see
with your eyes, your heart”). Danil, initially attempting to ignore Andrei,
softens and they reconcile. Danil wishes him luck. (Danil is clearly depicted to
be a good man, and the relationship between Andrei and Danil is clearly strong.)

I am getting less interested in a summary (I want to reform the Wikipedia
summary) and want to discuss the significance of individual parts of these
episodes.

Kirill, sulks in much of this episode. In his room we hear him quoting
Ecclesiastes. This is the second time Ecclesiastes has been quoted in the film.
When he leaves the monastery, he quotes Matthew. Then he beats his dog dead.

These scenes, expecially the next few, do not have clear, explicit continuity.
They are episodes within episodes. We have Andrei and Foma walking in the woods,
talking, setting up a dichotomy between the two (Andrei can’t work when he’s too
full, Foma can’t work when he’s too hungry), we meet Theophanes in the woods,
who boxes Foma’s ears and ridicules him, and we have Foma playing with a dead
swan—which I will discuss shortly. Then we cut to the banks of a river, Andrei
and Theophanes talk past each other. Theophanes expresses cynical views of
people, ignorance, and sin; Andrei is clearly idealistic. Then we have a Passion
reenactment where we get the real Andrei Rublev’s views on the crucifixion.

Interlude: Bird Symbolism
-------------------------

The swan is clearly significant. An interesting symbol analysis from
afwriting.tumblr.com describes it in the context of recurring bird symbols. In
Christian iconography the bird represents, alternatively, the Holy Ghost and the
Christian Soul (especially during its ascension to Heaven). Therefore, whenever
we see a bird on screen, it seems to me, our immediate thought should be about
what is happening to the character’s soul. The afwriting analysis, however,
seems to see them as representing at times _faith_, which would, I think be
encompassed within analysis of the soul.

Therefore, the bird images afwriting details are:

1. The swan seems to represent Foma’s soul, faith, spirit: it is dead. He flicks
   a beatle off of it and examines the bird’s wing: it is the first moment Foma
   has a care for his soul. Perhaps he will improve upon it. He is certainly
   examing it.
2. In Episode III, Holiday, several birds fall from trees as Andrei journeys
   toward the Pagan ritual. Afwriting, in its faith analysis, says this
   represents the crumbling of Andrei’s strict form of faith. This doesn’t seem
   like a bad analysis (apparently it was written by a 16 year old—I wish I’d
   gone to a school that made true comprehension of symbolism a priority!); but
   in the soul-analysis it might represent the falling away of any kind of
   restraint Andrei had. Another aspect not here considered is the
   sparrow-motif: falling birds, in Matthew 10:19, specifically falling
   _sparrows_ represent divine providence. We will next see Andrei captured,
   threatened with death, and subsequently freed.
3. During the Raid episode, two geese fall from the roof of the Cathedral.
   Afwriting notes the next shot, of the Prince’s younger brother, looking
   remorseful. 

There are other instances, I may detail them upon revisting the film (in it’s
205 minute version) this weekend.

III. The Holiday (1408)
-----------------------

This episode covers a pagan ritual that Andrei stumbles on. Of all the episodes,
I found the _least_ symbol, save the interesting juxtaposition of Andrei’s faith
with the pagans’.

IV. The Last Judgement (Summer 1408)
------------------------------------

This episode is extraordinarily brutal—perhaps not as brutal as the next
episode, but still pretty brutal nonetheless. In fact, it seems to be the first
true instance of brutality; everything prior was small, subtle—the jester
knocked unconscious, the beaten dog, the threats of violence in the Holiday
episode.

The Last Judgement, however, depicts the brutal (I wish there was a fancy Latin
word for stabbing out an eyeball) stabbing out of the mason’s eyeballs so they
cannot replicate the work performed at the Grand Prince’s brother’s mansion.
This is the first real instance of the rivalry between the Grand Prince and his
brother, which occupies a good deal of the rest of the film.

It’s an interesting rivalry, too. I have seen it pointed out that Buth the Grand
Prince Vasily I of Moscow and his younger brother Prince Yury of Zvenigorod are
played by the same person, Yuriy Nazarov. I myself had a great deal of
difficulty figuring out what was going on with those characters. As I’ve said,
the film is particularly ineffective at clarifying the action on screen, i.e.,
the relationships, characters, and motives. I am beginning to believe, however,
after I watched the Robert Bird discussion of the film, that this is a result of
continuity issues in the 186 minute version of the film. I’m going to watch the
205 minute version this weekend.

This scene also introduces us to Durochka, the holy fool played by Tarkovsky’s
wife. I still cannot remember her name every being said on screen, but the
Wikipedia refers extensively to her.

V. The Raid (Autumn 1408)
-------------------------

This is the cinematic heart of the film. The climax of the Grand Prince and the
Prince’s rivalry. The Prince leads a group of Tatars on a raid of Vladimir, the
city where the church Andrei is painting the feast is. There is some connection
between the city and the Grand Prince that I cannot remember. But the Prince
certainly raids Vladimir _because_ of that connection.

In the scene we see (1) an excess of violence (much of which is cut in the 185
minute version), (2) Andrei murder a Tatar to save Durochka from being raped,
and a hallucinatory conversation between Andrei and Theophanes the Greek. The
first item reinforces multiple themes from the film. 

- The transitory, laughably violent and horrible way life transpires; this theme
  is stated many times through the first half of the film, especially through
  repeated quotations from Ecclesiastes, perhaps the most cynical (and beautiful
  and _true_) book of the Bible. Theophanes the Greek himself vocalizes many of
  these ideas while alive, especially in Episode II. These themes are also
  elucidated by the rivalry between the Grand Prince and the Prince: the people
  are at the mercy of two horrible rivals; their deaths mean nothing more than
  the spite and enmity between those two. This is a common theme in Greek
  mythology: whichever God wins, everybody loses. It is also a theme about
  governments, and we could interpret a cold war allegory here.
- Andrei’s murder of the Tatar sets up the vow of silence cycle of the rest of
  the film. It ties him to Durochka, whom he brings to the monastery in the next
  episode, and for whom he feels a paternal bond.
- The conversation between Andrei and Theophanes is perhaps the most interesting
  part of this episode for the following reaons:
    1. It shows quite clearly that Theophanes came to represent Andrei’s mentor,
       which was not at all clear from the beginning of the film. One could tell
       he respected the man, but not that he revered him or looked up to him.
    2. It depicts a full circle transformation of Andrei. He has been shown
       throughout the film to have somewhat of an over idealistic faith and
       attitude toward life. This is most clearly depicted in his earlier
       conversation with Theophanes in Episode II (the positions of which have
       been reversed now). It was also shown in his refusal to paint something
       he didn’t believe in. Now, however, having seen the meaninglessness of
       all this violence, and having killed a man himself (despite for good
       cause) he is cynical and Theophanes is encouraging him to be idealistic.

VI. Silence (Winter 1412)
-------------------------

Andrei has taken a vow of silence and refuses to paint. He has brought Durochka
back to the monastery. Kirill, a broken man, has returned to the monastery as
well, chastened and humbled by his time in the wilderness.

The most fascinating aspect of this episode is what happens to Durochka. She
plays with the leader of the Tatars who murdered everyone in Vladimir. Anrei
tries to pull her away, but, like a child, she refuses to leave. Eventually she
goes with the Tatar leader.

Andrei saved her from being raped by a Tatar and she ends up going with one
willingly. This reinforces the pointlessness of action against evil. This film
is profoundly inspired by Ecclesiastes.

Of _course_ Andrei should have saved Durochka from being raped in the beginning.
I am not trying to say that it wasn’t a noble act, and I’m not trying to say
that Durochka willingly going away with the Tatars is equivalent to rape,
_though she is clearly too feebleminded to know what the Tatar leader has in
mind for her_. But the ending in the next episode to the Durochka arc is
fascinating in light of this precise dichotomy: Andrei saves her from Tatar-rape
only for her to go willingly to a Tatar.

VII. The Bell (Spring-Summer-Winter-Spring 1423-1424)
-----------------------------------------------------

The Bell is perhaps the most beautiful episode of the entire film. Some people
have apparently said that it could stand on its own and be a film unto itself.
Andrei hardly even features in the entire episode except as an observer.

We watch the ballsy con of the young son of a bellmaker: he convinces the Grand
Prince’s men to put him in charge of the casting of a massive bell. And he
completely pulls it off, while knowing that (a) he doesn’t have a clue if it
will work and (b) if it fails to ring he will be beheaded, along with the rest
of his crew. This reminds me of _Y Tu Mamá También_, how Tenoch and Julio make
up a beach called Boca de Cielo to get an attractive older woman to go on a road
trip with them _and then it turns out to be real anyway_. The difference between
these story arcs, though, is that for Boriska, the bellmaker, his very _life_
rests on the success of _his_ gamble.

The first thing I’ll note is that Durochka returns in this scene, all in
(virginal) white, her face clear and smiling, baby in tow. The Tatar leader
clearly treated her well. Narratively-speaking, this all makes sense, and
reinforces the fact that a person can be cruel one moment, and extraordinarily
kind and loving another. But symbolically, it reinforces the pointlessness of
action. Perhaps this is the lesson for creatives: we create because we cannot
action is pointless. Art is observatory creation, not action.

The final episode is extraordinarily uplifting. But it’s also extraordinarily
cynical. Boriska cries because...God, I’m almost unable to put it into words,
yet I _feel_ it. There is a kind of dejecting _pointlessness_ to the success of
Boriska’s con. His father died without “telling him the secret of bellmaking”
that he taunts his workers and the Grand Prince’s men with throughout the
episode. It seems one could conclude that he successfully cast the bell through
pure luck, reinforcing the Ecclesiastes point of the whole film. A piece of
philosophy I read years ago made the point that arbitrary reward is as morally
debilitating as arbitrary punishment. I honestly believe this is one of the
central points of the episode. It’s also one of the central points of
Ecclesiastes. _There is no moral order_. _God is silent_.

The lesson of Ecclesiastes is to enjoy life while you can, precisely because of
this lack of a moral order. It’s perhaps my favorite book of the Bible, and I
believe it resonates more with atheists than Christians. Atheists already
believe there is no moral order, where as Christians, who believe that God
represents precisely that moral order, have a hard time assimilating the book
into their world view (they’re more effective at assimilating Song of Solomon,
an erotic love poem, than Ecclesiastes, which, in a fascinating committee-like
decision, was placed after the book the Christians _do_ enjoy, that I found
profoundly formulaic, Proverbs).

It is clear that Tarkovsky takes heavy thematic elements from Ecclesiastes.
Robert Bird in his interview has said that Tarkovsky certainly wasn’t a
religious scholar, and was barely initiated into Christian philosophy and
literature. He noted that Tarkovsky was probably more familiar with the themes
of Christianity through Soviet anti-Christian propoganda than anything directly
from Christianity. It’s therefore easy to imagine the young Tarkovsky reading
the Bible in preparation for this work and feeling his heart sing to
Ecclesiastes. I certainly did the first time I read it. It is the most
accessible part of the Bible to a non-Christian or atheist. It provides what is
perhaps the most effective ethical response to a lack of moral order, certainly
one that would inspire an artist.

Wow, in reading the Talk section of the Wikipedia page on Wikipedia I found this
quote:

>Ecclesiastes is frequently cited by atheists as their favourite book of the
>bible. Just wanted to add that here:) --80.228.154.61 17:52, 13 September 2005
>(UTC) 

I just added the film to the Wikipedia page.

I’m quoting from my _The Seventh Seal_ analysis:

>Truth be told, Andrei Rublev’s basic character movement/plot, while told
>masterfully, is rather simplistic: it is the same as that in _All the King’s
>Men_: it is the tale of an overly idealistic young man who encounters the
>ugliness in life and becomes hard and cynical and finds a way to come back to a
>happy medium, a chastened idealism. I don’t know why I wrote that in here, it
>belongs in the other observation.
