# Thu Nov 15 20:39:41 EST 2018
----------------------------
## Olivier Assayas’ _Clouds of Sils Maria_
=======================================

I am a little over half way through this film and felt the need to make some
comments immediately so that I may not forget them.

First, Assayas is a very big fan of the cross-fade and the fade-to, pause,
fade-from black. The cross-fade is generally a fade between time, but the
black-fades are highly significant, like he’s moving on to a new idea, emotion,
etc. They mark a significant departure.

Second, I must say I am not at all certain how to judge Kristen Stewart’s
acting. I believe she inhabits a role of self-conscious millenial quite adeptly.
If that is what she is going for, in every film I have ever seen her, then she
is a master. She has an embarassed snort-laugh that she employs quite often,
sometimes to ill-effect. I am judging her harsher than I mean to, but I noticed
just now, at 55:32, that as she’s reading through the script for the
film-within-the-film for Juliette Binoche’s character, she is acting as though
she is a person reading a script, _but she always acts as though she is a person
reading a script_, where other actors inhabit their roles and give them life,
she always has an embarrassed, postmodern, blasé countenance and tone. I cannot
tell whether it is because she cannot act worth a goddamn, or because she is one
of the finest actresses of my generation. It is a conundrum, goddammit.

I mean seriously, is it acting if she acts like herself? Is it acting if her
character is portrayed nearly always as _how she herself would react_? She is
the opposite of method. Perhaps I have not seen enough of her roles, but I have
seen quite a few (_Into the Wild_, all of the _Twilights_—I can’t believe I have
to say that—and I suppose now this. Of course the _Twilights_ were absolute
garbage, but...) and in every one she acts like herself. She never embodies a
character contrary to her own personality. She could not play, for instance, a
mother who has lost her own child. Or could she? Perhaps she would simply
imagine how she would react to losing her own child and play that. What about,
say, a mid-nineteenth-century Russian countess? Keira Knightly can play that.
Could Kristen Stewart? I just can’t say.

I’ve read highly intelligent people praise her acting ability. From Criterion
Colletion’s own blog:

>Always content to take on ancillary roles if they strike her fancy, Stewart
>has, like Michelle Williams, found her indie footing playing a range of stuck,
>trapped, or incomplete women whose surface cool detachment covers for inner
>tumult. 

Finally, before I resume the film, I must note that Assayas’s central conceit is
really quite brilliant. The film-within-a-film-remake with the role-reversal and
parallels is really fantastic. The film was somewhat a snog until we met Klaus.
Then my interest piqued.

Assayas’ score is peculiarly baroque. Perhaps because of the baroqueness of the
plot itself?

Five minutes later, I’m beginning to see this film opening up like a book.

The central conceit of the film is a relationship between an older woman and a
younger woman. It is explored in a multitude of ways, through the actress Maria
and her younger co-star Ellis, through the memories and onscreen analysis of the
actress Maria and her older co-star in the original film-within-a-film, though
the onscreen relationship between Maria Enders and her personal assistant
Valentine.

As such, when, in the next scene Maria and Valentine go for a swim, when
Valentine strips down to her underwear and Maria strips naked, we see a major
onscreen symbol of the way a relationship between an older and younger woman
transpires, who exposes more of their heart, etc. The same dynamic is shown
again and again in their discussion of the film-within-the-film, their reading
of the film-within-the-film, etc.

---

On Fri Nov 16 08:03:22 EST 2018 I’m going to finish making some comments.

First, before I begin, I want to just issue a blanket statement about Olivier
Assayas films after having seen two, one a small French production and the other
a large-ish indie American production: he is fond of non-conventional narratives
with subdued but highly charged endings and unexplained story phenomena.

I am entirely at a loss to explain Valentine’s disappearance. It is so abrupt
and unexplained that it cannot be seen as anything _but_ symbolic. She
disappears right after I made the observation that she is far more
self-confident and aware of where she is and  what she is doing than her boss.
It is right before they observe the Maloja Snake, which seems to be a symbol of
the way time slithers, how we take on the roles we hate, how the young consume
the old.

Valentine’s disappearance almost leads me to think she represents a part of
Maria’s subconscious. Fascinatingly, she does express a point that I myself have
expressed, specifically regarding Madonna: “You cannot be where you are, as
successful and awarded as you are, and still hold onto the benefits of youth.”
To which Maria responds “So I can only feel young if I don’t want to be young.”
“Exactly.” Or somewhere thereabouts.

The penultimate scene, where a director is pitching his sci-fi story to Maria,
is interesting. It’s the last sustained dialogue in the entire film, and the
director expresses his disgust with his era/generation. Previously in the film
it seemed quite clear that the director Klaus was an Olivier Assayas
analogue/vehicle, though he never truly expresses real opinions about the
outside world. Perhaps it is best to assume Klaus is simply the narrarator, who
gives us the most tidbits about the meaning of the plot of the entire film by
discussing the plot-within-a-plot. (Apparently, it is not a film-within-a-film
but a play-within-a-film; I was never completely clear on that.) But this new
sci-fi director seems to actually express Assayas’ opinions. He hates his era
and generation. While this certainly seems like The Opinion of the Director it’s
his next words that are more important: his character is “outside of time,”
“timeless.” As is the Maloja Snake, and by extension, the Jo-ann–Maria sequence
of women, seems to be the point.

Chloë Grace Moretz’s character turns out, predictably, to be a little bitch.
In the antepenultimate scene, where Maria asks Jo-ann to linger for two seconds
before storming out in a scene that sounds to be essentially the moment of
consumption (where the young take the place of the old) Jo-ann says, quite
matter-of-factly, “No one gives a fuck about Helena.”

Unfortunately, that’s mostly true, but more true in Hollywood than independent
and arthouse cinema. There is another layer to this film, which is directly
about Juliette Binoche (and perhaps Kristen Stewart). Maria Enders _is_ Juliette
Binoche, that never seems unclear. And the dynamic between Kristen Stewart and
Juliette Binoche seems to be a Maloja Snake. In the play-within-the-film the
Maloja Snake is supposed to be a disastrous affair, but it’s really this
dynamic, of young women taking over for old, in a variety of ways but mostly it
seems in a horrible young-consume-the-old way. Kristen Stewart may have gotten
her start in the horrible _Twilight_ series, but she is probably the most
high-profile indie actress today. When one actually looks at her filmography
today, she is a woman of actual depth, even directing a highly-conceptual short
film using neural nets (idk wtf she did with them, but, Wikipedia).

Given all that, the fact that this film fascinates us is a strong rebuke to the
youth-obsession of Hollywood. Juliette Binoche is the most fascinating thing
onscreen, and she’s 54. More to the point, though, there is an irony about this
dynamic: in the film, Juliette’s character exudes youthful naïveté while
Stewart’s character is full of knowing wisdom (except when she’s talking about
gossip, which is when we see her Millenial come out). And we see Stewart’s
character replaced by a personality-less, diversity-as-a-commodity vaguely Asian
British personal assistent.

Truth be told, the dynamic described in the Maloja Snake is this as well: a
young woman who takes advantage of the innocent blindness of an older woman to
advance her position in the world.

The other most fascinating thing about the film is the fact that the vast
majority of interesting characters are women. All the male characters are
entirely one-dimensional. While not, perhaps, flat, they show no movement.
Assayas is a male director, and he portrays all the directors on film as male,
and makes them all fairly well-meaning, all-knowing, and comfortable in their
skin: Wilhelm, the father figure for Maria who never appears onscreen, Klaus,
seems to be a father figure onscreen for Jo-ann.

And my observation trails off.

I loved a line from Valentine about the crappy sci-fi flick that they see with
Jo-ann Ellis starring: “If it was set on a farm or in a factory, you’d love it.”

Well, yeah.
