# Dark
#### Tue 07 Jul 2020 08:00:31 PM EDT
With the release of the third and final season of Dark I am ecstatic to finish
this series. Unfortunately, much of it is relatively rough in my memory, and as
I watch the first two episodes of Season 3 I felt a little lost and bored.

So! I am going to rewatch seasons 1 and 2 and write in this markdown file my
observations. This is a sufficiently complex work of art to merit a significant
amount of literary analysis, so that is what I am going to do.

Before I begin I'd just like to say a few things about my observations the first
two times I watched this series:

The cycles are 33 years. This is the Christ cycle. The life cycle, as it were.

The two time fluctuations are in the cave and the nuclear power plant. They are
connected to one another. This is because the cave represents our past, and the
nuclear power plant represents our future. They are inextricably linked.

"Sic Mundus Creatus Est" means "Thus the world was created." Viz., out of time.

The family dysfunction across generations within the eternal recurrence theme
serves to personalize the universe: we re-enact our parents foibles. We commit
the same sins visited upon us.

Okay! Now to begin!

## Season 1
### Episode 1
#### Tue 07 Jul 2020 08:10:03 PM EDT
Ah, the letter is to be opened on my birthday. Inter√©ssant.

Yes, I know it is a German television show, I will still be using French words.

The intro is still one of th emost lovely and fascinating pieces of video art.
The reflections produce some wild shapes and effects.

I feel like that yellow jacket is symbolic but I have no idea how. It is so
iconic to the series, they even sell it online.

Probably insignificant, but the Mikkel's caretaker keeps his letter in a box
with a tree on it. IIRC there's a tree on the door to the passageway. The world
tree seems likely. Yggdrasil?

The thing perhaps most intriguing to me about the nuclear power plant is that
Germany is currently in the process of phasing out all nuclear power. I think
they are retarded for that, and it's caused them to rely more heavily on coal,
but it's a fact and the writers are aware of it, which makes the power plant =
future equation more shaky and weird. In the series the plant is being shut
down. Why is the future being taken off line?

Obviously all of Mikkel's magic and Houdini obsession is just resonance with the
deeper theme material. It's the sort of detail that lesser writers miss. They
don't see that every bit of a story should feed thematically into the whole.

I don't remember the first time I saw this hearing how many English words the
Germans use. I know the French are like this too. I've heard fuck, hey, and
bullshit already.

Germans and the forest, man. I don't even know.

### Episode 2
#### Tue 07 Jul 2020 09:00:29 PM EDT
The burnt eyes really seems symbolic. I mean, of course, blindness has been a
symbol throughout history and literature. Oedipus is the first thing that comes
to mind.

Old Jonas is really very menacing in the early part of the series. I don't
remember why he was experimenting on the Oberdorf (or whatever) boy.

They definitely make it seem pretty clear that Old Jonas killed the Obendorf
boy.

I don't know if it's Germany, or just a TV show, but who the hell lives in the
house they grew up in.

### Episode 3
#### Thu 09 Jul 2020 07:49:30 PM EDT
Why would a German ever buy a French car? I'm not even asking for nationalistic
reasons. French cars are absolute shit.

Okay, so that was a detour. I googled "Are French cars shit" to see if I am
correct in this belief and someone shat on the stereotype. I don't even know why
I try sometimes.

I can have very intelligent discussions about the Bible. I know quite a lot
about scripture. But I cannot just quote off scripture, save like 3 verses, and
that bothers me. Same with good old Billy. I have read about a thid of his
works. I cannot just rattle off a Shakespeare quote for the occasion. Well,
idk, maybe I can and just never try?

"Fox hide, all and after!"

"When the wind is north north westerly, I know a hawk from a handsaw."

Okay, I've exhausted what's on the tip of my tongue.

"Not a whit, we defy augury! There is a special providence in the fall of a
sparrow."

Maybe I have a few more, I just wish I was better at that. (This digression is
inspired by a farmer in Dark quoting Mark 13:33.)

The soundtrack for this series is so great. The side-by-sides are so effective,
showing these people in '86 and '19. What is so effective about this series is
the way it humanizes it's characters through their simultaneous developments.
All humans exist in time, and so change. We can only know a person over time.

### Episode 4
#### Sun 12 Jul 2020 04:43:00 PM EDT
Birds are always symbolic. Mass bird kill, while clearly a shocking motif in all
sci-fi, is probably symbolic, or at least lends itself to symbolic analysis, in
Dark.

Usually birds individually represent freedom, or the human soul. Here, mass bird
kill, would seem to refer to the trap of time the characters, and by extent all
of us, experience.

The fact that the children disappear specifically seems so significant. Like, I
interpret everything in this series as being a symbol of eternal recurrence of
human drama and pain. It is as though children are snatched by time, by our own
discord.

Something peculiar to time warp dramas (Harry Potter 3, Dark, Star Trek First
Contact, Timeline, etc., etc.) is that insignificant contingencies often come to
take on extreme importance and seem almost inevitable, required even.

### Episode 5
#### Sun 12 Jul 2020 06:26:34 PM EDT
I wonder if Jonas' name is as biblical as Noah. Jonah is related but not the
same. Though Jonah is not a popular name like Jonas.

I've said it once and I'll say it again: the way this series juxtaposes the
characters' faces from then and now in different situations is so effective at
filling out the interior emotional lives of those characters. It has to be one
of the most effective things about the entire series.

This series makes me want to read more Heidegger so bad. And yet, it's never
fun.

### Episode 6
#### Sun 12 Jul 2020 07:46:41 PM EDT
The costume of the narrator kid in the play is clearly thematically rhyming with
the burns on the eyes of the dead kid discovered in the forest. [30:01]

I mean, how can the story of Theseus and the Minotaur would be symbolic. Like,
Old Jonas even calls time a labyrinth.

What is so fucking real about this series is how beautifully ambivalent the
characters are. Katharina and Ulrich are the popular bad kids, but really, are
they? Regina and Hannah are both victims of Katharina and Ulrich's carelessness,
but also perpetrators of pain on others, and, to an extent, almost psychopaths.
The love triangle of Bartosz, Martha, and Jonas is incredibly true to life.
Everyone is so multi-faceted and written in the round. I don't think there's a
single flat character in the entire series.

I dislike the Germans. I think they are sanctimonious, sometimes quite ignorant,
isolationist, self-absorbed, haughty, and too conservative by half. But they
can also be stunningly trenchant observers of human nature and reality.
Heidegger was a massively self-absorbed douchebag who hurt everyone around him
and never owned up to his own failings, but he perhaps saw the nature of reality
better than anyone before or since. That is Germanness. And, to the extent that
I can accept myself, I think I am one. It is perhaps for that very reason I hate
them so much.

I speak French. I have been obsessed with the French since I was a teenager. I
need to learn Spanish. But I have a very strange inclination to learn German.
We'll see.

This series is an exploration of philosophical concepts like eternal recurrence
and mythological themes. But it is also, in a deeper sense, an exploration of
how we're all alone together. The epistemological separateness of humanity. We
cannot know each other. A solipsistic exploration of the human condition, of
loneliness.

I watch these characters break down crying and it echoes what I feel inside,
during this pandemic, living with my family but feeling so separate from them,
trapped in their cult, obsessed with a fascisistic leader. The series may touch
on 1920-1953-1986-2019-2052, but the bunker is quite clearly built in WWII. The
stench of history hangs over the Germans always.

### Episode 7
#### Mon 13 Jul 2020 04:33:50 PM EDT
The 33 year cycle makes sense from a purely physical sense. Let's say you travel
through time but not space. Supposing absolute space exists (a supposition that
is not a given), if you were to travel 25 years in time, but stay in the same
physical space, you would die in the vacuum of space, because the earth is not
in the same place. Technically, with the earth alone, this would be fine on a
yearly basis. Therefore the 33 year cycle is perhaps more interested in the
symbolic function of 33 years. But a discrete requirement of time travel makes
complete sense.

### Episode 8
#### Mon 13 Jul 2020 06:10:28 PM EDT
Given the name of the town, Winden, is German for wind (I believe it's a plural?
winds?), there seems to be a bit of forethought on this. In the series, the
wormhole tunnel is always very windy when the door is opened. It would be
entirely plausible that there would be massive air pressure differences between
localized times. But there's something funnier in that: the winds of time.

Something I have believed for some time, picking up from earlier when I was
talking about the necessity of contingencies, is that reality is not composed of
incidental contingencies but larger trends and functional ruts. Change any
little contingent event in history and it will still turn out mostly the same.
This is entirely contrary to most people's instincts, but it's how I view a lot
of things: morality, temporalism, history, fate. The arc of history bends toward
justice is a high-minded way of seeing this.

I see morality as being relative, in the sense that I am not in any way a "moral
realist." I really believe it would require supernatural agency to conclude in
any form of moral realism. That said, there are certain human universal morals:
not killing, not hurting others, not stealing (in societies with private
property). The conclusion is that human beings have universal morals, but how
can that be if there is no moral realism? Well, simply through logic these are
morals that allow for the continued existence of human society. These are the
most essential "functional ruts" of moral society. Smaller, more idiosyncratic
"functional ruts" come into existence through the continued interaction of a
given society. Almost like informal jurisprudence.

Species are not "real." There is no Platonistic Ideal Form of the Human Being.
But through functional ruts there exists a large body of co-occurring traits
that we call human beings. The same can basically be said for every species.
Sometimes the gradients along a given set of species is blurry. That is because
there is no necessity for reality to define further the border between those two
species. Race is even more fuzzy like this.

History, likewise, is like this. Or at least, this is how I view it. We hear
about contingencies in history all the time in alternative history. What if the
allies lost at Midway. What if the South won Gettysburg. What if Winston
Churchill had died crossing the road? Well, I have a feeling history would not
have turned out that much more different than it has. Certainly there would be
slight changes, and the more contingent a given incidental that you change the
greater the changes, but we'd probably still be talking on cell phones and
worrying about the spread of democracy and human rights. We're human beings, and
the same forces would be at play.

I, being a human being, am full of contradictions. Thus, I often spend some time
wondering about if the Athenians had won the Pelopponesian War (the Athenians,
if you are unaware, were the ancient equivalent of the DNC: able to snatch
defeat from the clutches of victory; hell, they're both democrats). I often
think, man, democracy would have been acendant, Athens would have reached even
greater heights, Rome may never have gotten off the ground, the Mediterannean
may have remained the center of civilization, who knows what ramifications that
might have had. Sparta's victory over Athens is the ancient equivalent of the
Nazi's beating the allies.

Except that's probably bullshit and I'm just mentally masturbating. History is a
struggle of good (liberalism, freedom, equality) against evil (racialism,
tribalism, authoritarianism) and it always has been. The same forces would have
been at play then as now, and remarkably similar results would have prevailed.
We just might be speaking a weird cross between Celtic and Greek instead of
Celtic and Latin (I'm speaking here, of course, of French, and it's incredible
influences over English. If you've never realized it, English speakers are
basically speaking a form of French with a German grammatical structure).

Seeing the caves as the past and the power plant as the future, especially
through the lens of Germany's rejection of nuclear energy, makes the symbolism
very interesting, very complex.

Wow, this old fuck Tannhaus just came out and said it: the future influences the
past.

I've been saying this for a decade.

Causation does not exist. Necessitation does. Events require each other.

Imagine an old engine. There are part types A-Z. You have to replace part B, but
part B is no longer manufactured. So you have to get part Bb from the
manufacturer. Trouble is, part Bb is incompatible with part C, so you also have
to update part C to part Cb. Idealistically, let's just leave it there, but you
could have a whole cascade of dependency hell as a result of this. This is
reality. Time. Causation. Event C is dependent on part B, but just as much, B is
dependent on part C, so that you can't change them independently. There are
functional equivalences depending upon the resolution, but events necessitate
each other in complex webs of conditionality, often biconditionality.

Helge Doppler is the second child of the series to keep dead birds and stare at
them. Charlotte Doppler as a teenager was the first (I believe). They are not
blood. This is interesting for several reasons. The first is that it indicates
that the two characters have a deeper self-analytical soul than the other
characters. They are introspective. Or they long for freedom. The second thing
it prompts is an analysis of the name Doppler. The doppler effect has to do with
blue shifts and red shifts, objects approaching and receding and how that shifts
wave lengths. This seems relevant to the future. The Doppler family changes the
most over the course of the series? They are the strangest, to be sure.

### Episode 9
#### Mon 13 Jul 2020 08:50:36 PM EDT
I have nothing to say about this episode.

### Episode 10
#### Tue 14 Jul 2020 08:09:50 PM EDT
Peter Doppler, Tronte Nielsen, and Claudia Tiedemann. I think that's all the
families but the Kahnwalds. Are there any other families?

This series may take quite a lot from Nietzsche, but I swear there is Heidegger
in it.

The most significant thing I ever took from Heidegger was that our emotions and
feelings are not just chemicals but actual interactions with reality. That is to
say, the emotion of dread, or angst, is an internal mirror to nothingness. Here
as I type this it sounds far-fetched, but it is incredibly convincing in What is
Metaphysics? and I am convinced of the thesis.

When Tannhaus says "What does it matter if my decision was the result of a
causal link or a vague feeling?" I read it as a statement that is nearly one and
the same. That vague feeling is not meaningless chemical interactions but
internal representations of reality.

This music is so Glassian.

I love orphic predictions.
