## Cinematic Journey

I have recently renewed my interest in cinema. As such I am going
through the Criterion collection and watching Mark Cousins’ *The Story
of Film: An Odyssey*, as well as a number of alternative sources for
cinematic history.

As such, I am watching a lot of movies. The best way to absorb them is
to write about them. Thus, this repo.

I am chiefly interested in cinema’s symbolic and literary dimensions.
After that, I will comment on cinematography, directing style,
characterization, dialogue, and all the other features that go into a
film. Truth be told, I am absolutely *not* reviewing these films. I am
simply writing about them.

The file `journal.md` is just that, a cinematic journal. Each review is
a new markdown file beginning with the date in `YYYYMMDD_<title>.md`
format. I will use English titles with underscore spaces for the
filenames and the original language’s titles for the title within the
file, as well as a translation (for reference, especially in cases where
the original title is in Cyrillic or Japanese). The journal is a
hodgepodge.

## Update 20200605

This project has more or less fallen off. I cancelled my Criterion
Channel subscription because I haven't been using and and I wanted to
save some money. I haven't been watching many films, despite speaking
French now (the primary purpose of learning being to watch French art
films) but hopefully I will eventually get back to it.

I would also like to alphebetize this, despite it being ordered by date
viewed/written. I used a command to write in the filenames to write the
links, which is why they are ordered by date (the filenames begin with a
date).

- [2020-07 Dark](Dark.md)

## [Film Journal](journal.md)

## Old Reviews

  - [Bladerunner](bladerunner.md)
  - [Beauty & the Beast](20181027_the_beauty_and_the_beast.md)
  - [Orpheus](20181028_orpheus.md)
  - [Stalker](20181031_stalker.md)
  - [Andrei Rublev 185 Minute Version](20181108_andrei_rublev_185_minutes.md)
  - [The Seventh Seal](20181110_the_seventh_seal.md)
  - [Andrei Rublev 205 Minute Version](20181111_andrei_rublev_205_minutes.md)
  - [Columbus](20181112_columbus.md)
  - [Clouds of Sils Maria](20181115_clouds_of_sils_maria.md)
  - [The Endless](20181116_the_endless.md)
  - [Children of Paradise](20181118_children_of_paradise.md)
  - [Summer with Monika](20181120_summer_with_monika.md)
  - [Wild Strawberries](20181120_wild_strawberries.md)
  - [Breathless](20181121_breathless.md)
  - [Drive](20181122_drive.md)
  - [Only God Forgives](20181123_only_god_forgives.md)
  - [The Meg](20181124_the_meg.md)
  - [The Neon Demon](20181124_the_neon_demon.md)
  - [In Darknes](20181125_in_darkness.md)
  - [The Revenant](20181125_the_revenant.md)
  - [Tokyo Story](20181127_tokyo_story.md)
  - [Au Hasard Balthazar](20181202_au_hasard_balthazar.md)
  - [The Sacrifice](20181202_the_sacrifice.md)
  - [A Man Escaped](20181207_a_man_escaped.md)
  - [Pickpocket](20181209_pickpocket.md)
  - [Hell or High Water](20190310_hell_or_high_water.md)
